ATTORNEY GENERAL

c.c.   Solicitor General




You are to meet Mr George Howarth MP tomorrow (Wednesday)
together with Mr Gerry Birmingham MP and Mr Peter Kilfoyle MP who
wish to make representations to you about the Hillsborough
disaster.    You have previously seen Mr Howarth when he made
representations about the decision of the Director of Public
Prosecutions not to institute criminal proceedings against any
persons arising out of the disaster.       His present concern
appears to be the manner in which the Coroner handled the
inquest.

The inquest was spread over something approaching 100 working
days and, I understand, took the form of the Coroner receiving
evidence relating to the circumstances of the event as a whole
before embarking upon a series of "mini-inquests" during which
he received evidence about the circumstances of each of the
individual deaths.    Much of that aspect of the evidence was
taken in documentary form, presumably to avoid the repeated
calling of witnesses who had dealt with more than one victim.


Mr Howarth first requested this meeting during the latter part
of 1991.   You indicated that you would be prepared to meet him
provided there were matters within your own responsibilities
which could be discussed.     His request did not indicate the
matters which he wanted to raise with you.  The reality is that
your role in relation to Coroners is a very limited one arising
from the consent provision in section 13 of the Coroners Act 1988
(copy annexed).

It has subsequently become clear from what from Mr Howarth said
recently in the House of Commons in a German debate about the
Taylor Report that you are perceived to have a very wide remit
so far as Coroners are concerned.     You have therefore written
to Mr Howarth setting out (copy enclosed) a letter which explains
precisely the scope of your responsibilities as the basis for the
meeting tomorrow.

LSLO does not have any detailed information as to the manner in
which HM Coroner handled the Hillsborough inquest; there is no
reason for us to do so. There has been no application for your
consent under section 13 of the Coroners Act 1988.     You have
received a letter from Mr Malcolm Thornton MP on behalf of one
constituent (a Mrs Williams) who considers the "mini-inquest"
held on her son to be unsatisfactory.  The principal difficulty
in that case is that two witnesses made statements suggesting
that Kevin Williams (aged 15) was still alive whilst receiving
resuscitation attempts on the pitch and subsequently uttered the
word "mum" whilst in the mortuary.     The medical evidence was
however quite clear and, in the view of the Coroner, conclusive
that death had occurred within minutes of the crushing and what
was witnessed was post-mortem "twitching" and the exhalation of
air. A copy of your letter to Mr Thornton is annexed.    You have
concluded that the material put forward by his constituent does
not justify an application to the High Court for a fresh inquest.
That does not, of course, mean that you would not consider a
reasoned application on their behalf. It has been suggested by
Mr and Mrs Williams that they are taking legal advice with a view
to making a formal application.
In these circumstances, you can do very little tomorrow except
listen to the representations they make.       If it appears that
they are in effect urging a change in Coronersâ€™ procedures for
disasters cases, that is a matter for the Home secretary.  Any
decision about consent under section 13 would have to be in
response to a properly reasoned application.




S J WOOLER
11 February 1992
