                                        cc   Mr Preston G1



Mr Whallev



HILLSBOROUGH PUBLIC INQUIRY - COSTS


I promised to let you have a note on the overall cost   of the
Inquiry.  The attached print-out produced by Accounts   Branch
shows that as at 31 January 1990 bills amounting to a   total of
£479,048.68 had been paid.  That figure is made up of   the
following:-

                                             £

     Civil Service salaries              76,980.47
     Travel and subsistence              32,893.23
     Stationary and printing              1,351.27
     General expenses                   218,402.25
     Legal representation               134,500.00
     Research                            14,921.46


               Total (31/1/90)         £479,048.68

2.   The figure is substantially lower than our budget estimate
(and provision) of £900,000, but it needs qualifying.  Several of
the sub-heads need amendment to reflect bills submitted but not
yet paid, and to incorporate further payments made since then.
In particular, a further £113,661.64 has been paid out in respect
of legal co s t s .

3.   There is no guarantee, however, that this will be the final
payment on that sub-head.  You have seen Hill Dickinson's letter
of 2 February in which they say they are unhappy with the way
their costs have been dealt with.  Should the Hillsborough
Steering Committee react similarly (and given the more drastic
pruning of their bill and the number of individual firms
involved, I think it likely), we may ultimately have to pay out
up to £100,000 more.  That would push the total Inquiry costs up
to a little over £690,000.

4.   In addition, there are a number of relatively minor bills to
be added to other sub-heads.  On research. Dr Nicholson     told
me yesterday that HSE will this week be submitting a bill for
some £5,000 in respect of Inquiry work done by their consultant.
Similarly, we have received travel and subsistence claims from
members of the Technical Working Party which will add a further
£1,000 or so to the total.
5.   We shall also need to include a figure for the cost of
copies of the Final Report supplied direct to the Inquiry and
Home Office.   I understand from Parliamentary Section that 1300
copies were supplied.   For the Interim Report, we were charged
(at discounted rate) £6,266.11 for 1000 copies.   We shall
probably be paying in the region of £9,000 this time.   (Such
figures do not, of course, include the total cost incurred by
HMSO in printing the Reports - I have asked them to let me have a
figure for this but, as a guide, production costs of the Interim
Report for Popplewell in 1985 totalled approximately £30,000.)

6.   Assuming payment as outlined in paragraphs*, the overall
cost of the Inquiry to the Home Office will be in the region of
£700,000.  Adding the full publication costs suggests a total
Inquiry cost of £750,000-E80,000.

7.   The difference between this and our earlier estimates can be
attributed largely to i) a saving of almost £50,000 on the bill
from Sheffield Town Hall, ii) the decision by their respective
employers not to charge the Home office for the Assessors' salary
and associated costs and iii) completion of the Inquiry before
financial year-end.

8.   I hope that, broad-brush though they are, these figures will
be helpful.




                                        JONATHAN SWEET
                                        Hillsborough Inquiry

6 February 1990

Ref:   FEP/89 35/48/123
31-JAN-9Q          SUBHEAD   H6                                                  PAGE   1



 F I N YEAR         89                       REPORT NO             11C.NS9

 ACCOUNTING
    CODE                     BALANCE                   SUBHEAD


  5036 7308                  479C4£.e:            H6 1 0 7 i\ L
  50367401                   11T22CT9?"           H6C13
  5 0 3 6 75-0 A               76980.47           Hecncn
  50367607                     76930.47           H6C13C13C13
  50367614                     70C42.C4           H6 C1 3 C1 3 C1 3
  50367621                       342£.72          H6C13C13C11
  50367638                            C. CO       H6E13C13C13
  50367645                            C - C3      H6C13C13C13
  50367^                      J2193-2.3           H6C1TC21 -=             jgJL
  5C367717                     32S93.23           H6ri3C23C13
  5C36 7 £ 03                         C.C3        H6 C13C31
  5C367810                            C.C3        H6 E1 3 C 3 3 C1 3
  50367^0^.                      1351.27          H6EHC43 O ^
  50367913                       11       37.27   H6 El 3 E43 E1 3
  50370033                   3 6 7 5 2 3 . 71_    H6Cll_OtU wr,
  5037QC41                   21 3402. 2           H6C23C13/IC-
  5 ^ 7 0010                           C.C J      H6E23C23}
  &7QQ2?                     1 3 4 50 C- . C3     H T       -3Jl L a ,'
  50370C34                     14921.45           H 6 E 23 r43\|S




                   PROCUCEC AT 1 3 : 3 1 : 3 2      ON D 1 / C 2 / ? C
