                       THE DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION & SCIENCE
                      ELIZABETH HOUSE YORK ROAD LONDON SEI7PH
                  SWITCHBOARD 071-934 9000 FAX 071-934 9082 GTN No. 3914




                                                              cr7   August 1991




      AL
                             FOOTBALL HOOLIGANISM

As you requested yesterday I have pleasure in enclosing a copy of the
Minister for Sport's working party report published in 1988 into the
then proposed national membership scheme. As you know following the
publication   of   Lord Justice    Taylor's    final report into the
Hillsborough Stadium Disaster, the Government decided not to proceed
with the proposed membership scheme as provided for under Part 1 of
the Football Spectators Act 1989. I understand that you have a copy of
Lord Justice Taylor's report and I hope that you have been able to
obtain a copy of the Act from the Vote Office.

The Government strategy in containing the problem of football
hooliganism has included supporting measures to improve facilities at
football grounds, and thereby promote better spectator behaviour, in
particular through the implementation of the Taylor timetable for allÂ­
seating, and to support the proposed Taylor offences of throwing a
missile, chanting obscene or racialist abuse and going onto a pitch
without reasonable cause. These football related offences are now on
the statute book in the Football (Offences) Act 1991 which I hope you
now have a copy of. More details on the Government's response to the
problem of football hooliganism are contained in the Government's
reply to the second report from the Home Affairs Committee Session
1990-91 which I referred to yesterday.

On the related but broader question of safety at football grounds, I
would refer you to the revised Green Guide published by the Home
Office and entitled "Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds". The House of
Common's library should be able to provide you with a copy of this. In
addition the Football Stadia Advisory Design Council has produced a
number of guideline publications relevant to the safety at football
grounds. You may wish to write to the Secretary, the FSADC, Winchester
House, 259-269 Old Marylebone Road, London NW1 5RA.

Yours sincerely




A R BADEN
Sport and Recreation Division
