THE FOOTBALL LICENSING AUTHORITY
 Room    1022
 50 Queen Anne's Gate
 London
 SW1H9AT

 Telephone: 071-273- 2322



 To Mr J Vaughan


 With compliments




                                   â€¢&<
                                                  17 January 1991




The Board has now had opportunity to consider the question of
when it might be ready to exercise powers which will be granted
to it under Sections 9 and 13 of the Football Spectators Act
1989. In both cases, the point at which the Authority will seek
the bringing into force of these powers is dependent upon the
Ground Safety Inspectorate.    The Board will want Section 13 to
be in place as soon as the Inspectors have both joined the
Authority and completed their formal induction and training
programme.   In the case of Section 9, the formation of the
trained Inspectorate will set in train the inspection of all
grounds where designated football matches are played.     Section
9 cannot be brought into force until the Authority is ready to
issue licences to all such grounds (save only where it may decide
a licence should not be granted) and will thus mark the end of
the first-time inspection process.
                                                '~ v

Good progress is being\made with recruitment of Inspectors.
Notification of selection is about to be issued to 6 successful
candidates. Interviews for the remaining 3 posts will take place
on 22/23 January and notification to the further successful
candidates should be made by the end of the month.     it is the
wish of the Authority that the Inspectors should take up post as
quickly as possible.     However, there are formularies to be
completed (verification of candidates, qualifications etc,
medical examination of all successful candidates, formal offers
of appointment etc) and for those currently in employment a
period of notice which is unlikely to be less than a month.
There will be a substantial period of induction and training
which might perhaps last around a month, although that is very
much subject to the outcome of the training analysis which is
being undertaken.     it is extremely important that the 9
Inspectors should be trained together and every effort will be
made to establish a common starting date.    When this might be
will depend on the response of candidates to their offers of
employment which will not be known until some time in February.

At this stage the Board is not committing itself to a time-table.
If you work through the various processes that must be completed
however, then you may perhaps conclude that 1 May as a starting
date for the Inspectors and maybe 1 June for Section 13 to come
into force begin to look realistic.


                                                                1
We shall review the position on bringing Section 13 into force
as soon as we are clear about the starting date for Inspectors.
As I have said, the period of training cannot now be settled but
we shall be asking the Home Office to have Section 13 brought
into force at the same time that the Inspectors' training has
been completed.    The aim is therefore for the powers under
Section 13 to be brought into force on the same date that
Inspectors take up their posts in their regions.

The inspection of grounds required before licences can be issued
is bound to take time. Each ground will have to be inspected at
least twice: once when a match is being played and once when the
ground is not in use.   Further re-inspection may in individual
cases be necessary, including some on match days.        The only
visits Inspectors are likely to make to grounds during the
1990/91 season will be largely or wholly as part of their
training programme.   Inspection proper of grounds in use will
effectively start at the beginning of the 1991/92 season. Each
region will have about 35 grounds to inspect and the season lasts
about 38 weeks. It is unrealistic to expect that inspection of
all designated grounds will be completed before the end of the
1991/92 season. The Authority does not wish to commit itself to
a date for introducing Section 9 until it has seen the inspection
process in operation and has considered in more depth the likely
content of licences. At this stage it can say only that it seems
unlikely that it will ask the Home Office to introduce Section
9 earlier than the beginning of the 1992/93 season.

Since it is likely to take about 2 months to have Section 13
brought into force from the date a decision is taken to do so,
we shall be in touch with you again about this in early March.

I would add also that we have meetings arranged with the Local
Authority Associations and the Football League around the end of
this month and intend to let them know what our plans are in
outline.

I have sent a copy of this letter to John Vaughan.




                                    G E DUNKLEY
                                    Chief Executive



Mr P E Bolton
Fire & Emergency Planning Department
Home Office

                                                               2
