                                                      3 0 JUL 1991   \Msh

                                         cc : Mr Turney
                  /                           Mr Fuller
                                                  Mdrl^Sv/ fi/¥l
                                              Mrr'T^l^sv/
                                              Mr Laing"’’

Mr Topping

HILLSBOROUGH LEGAL BILL

In Mr Gange's absence on annual leave,   I am replying to your note
of 22 July.

I accept it could not reasonably have been foreseen in January 1990
that the need £or final payment of this bill would not arise until
the financial year 1991-92.  However, that is beside the point.   If
the dispute about the bill had been resolved in 1990-91, there
would still have been the problem that no provision had been made
in the Estimates for expenditure associated with the Hillsborough
Inquiry in that year.  In other words, the Fire Department budget
would have been in precisely the same difficulties that confront it
now as to how it is going to pay this bill.


The position remains that in the first instance it is the
responsibility of the Fire Department to identify offsetting
savings which can be made within its own budget in order to release
funds to meet this, not wholly unexpected, liability.  The
implication in paragraph 3 of Mr Gange's note of 26 June was that
it was likely to be easier to find such savings from non-running
costs sub-heads than would have been the case if they had to be
found from running costs; but there is no rule that they have to
come from non-running costs, so perhaps your first course should be
to examine that alternative (although I understand you are already
projecting a large overspend on running costs).

If it should still be the case that the Fire Department budget
cannot find the money, then the rest of Mr Faulkner's budget should
be examined for spare capacity.  Mr Laing will be able to advise
you on this.




                                          S J MILLS

Finance Division 1
Queen A n n e 's Gate

2f t July 1991
