NOTE OF MEETING BETWEEN THE MINISTER FOR SPORT AND THE CHIEF
EXECUTIVE OF THE FOOTBALL LEAGUE: 19 JUNE
Present:   DES                          Football League
           The Minister for Sport       Mr Sandford
           Mr Vaughan                   Mr Hutt
           Mr Baden
           Miss Watts
The Premier League
1. Mr Sandford confirmed that the FA had instigated proceedings
in the High Court to clarify whether or not they could run a
Premier League. The League themselves were considering whether to
take legal proceedings against the FA in the form of judicial
review. They had     to decide whether to pursue thepublic     or
private law routes against the FA.

2.   Mr Sandford claimed that some of the smaller clubs in the
First Division were not at all sure of the merits of joining a
Premier League and were being pushed along by some of the larger
clubs. The Minister explained that this was not at all the
impression he had been given by the FA and therefore Mr Sandford
would need to substantiate this if there was to be any question
of an independent assessment of club views. It was important that
the Minister retained his position as an "honest broker" if he
were to retain credibility and intervene to bring the FA, League
and the PFA together at a later stage.

3.   Mr Sandford explained that the press reports of the Second
Division proposing   to leave the League referred toReg Burr of
Millwall with whom relations were strained!

League attitude to the Foundation for Sport and the Arts

4.   Mr Sandford said that the League was concerned that money
from football was going in part to fund the arts and that
Football League clubs would not have access to these funds. The
Minister appreciated this case but pointed to the benefit which
Football League clubs were obtaining through the reduction in
Pool Betting Duty in last year's budget and that the prospect of
a further Â£10Om, if the period of reduction in Pool Betting Duty
were extended to 10 years, was not affected by the proposed
establishment of the Foundation.
Ticket touting

5. Mr Sandford said that he understood ticket touting was not to
be an offence in Mr Wheeler's Private Members Bill and that the
Home Office were unlikely to be able to introduce legislation on
this until the session after next at the earliest. It was unclear
whether there would be a Criminal Justice Bill next session and
even if there were whether it would be possible to have a one
clause addition to create a ticket touting offence. Mr Atkins
said this would be followed up with the Home Office.


                                                                1
Sale of alcohol at football matches

6. Mr Sandford asked for the Minister's support in pressing for
the removal of the present requirement that clubs had to apply
twice during any year for a licence to sell alcohol at football
grounds.


SARD C
21 June 1991
