THE FOOTBALL LEAGUE



OBJECTIVES
1.     The Football League is a private company limited by
guarantee.   Its objectives are to conduct and control football
competitions, primarily the League Championship, the Littlewoods
Challenge Cup, and the Sherpa Van Trophy, and to safeguard the
interests of its "Full" Members - the 44 First and Second
Division clubs - and its "Associate" Members - the 48 Third and
Fourth Division clubs.      The League is responsible for the
preparation of fixtures, the registration of players, supervision
of transfers and the appointment of match officials.           In
practice, the League's activities take in intervention into any
issue which the League regards as bearing on the interest of the
League clubs. They are in business to promote those interests.
The League, its Management Committee and Chief Secretary are only
as powerful as the clubs allow them to be.


THE MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE
2.     The policy of the League is decided by a Management
Committee which has 8 members each ofâ€žwhom must be a director of
a football club. 4 of the Committee's members are elected by and
from clubs in Division 1, 3 from those in Division 2, and 1 from
those in the Third and Fourth Divisions.      Membership of the
Committee is limited to a 3 year term, renewable on election.

3.     The Committee is chaired by a President elected from its
membership.   The President of the Management Committee is the
President of the Football League.      Mr Bill Fox of Blackburn
Rovers FC was elected to the post at an Extraordinary General
Meeting on 11 August 1989.      Other members of the Management
Committee are Robert Chase (Chairman Norwich    FC), John Smith
(Chairman Liverpool FC), Reg Burr (Chairman Millwall FC), Doug
Ellis (Chairman Aston Villa       FC), Gordon McKeag (Chairman
Newcastle FC), Ian Stott (Chairman Oldham Athletic FC) and
Michael Sinclair (Chairman York City FC).


OTHER COMMITTEES
4.     In addition to the Management Committee the League also
has a number of specialist sub-committees.    Among these is an
anti-hooliganism committee which is chaired by Ian Stott. Other
sub-committees consider issues such as Referees, Footballers'
Further Education and Vocational Training and the League's
liaison with the Football Association.    The latter is a joint
Committee established with the FA which meets about every two
months to discuss issues of mutual interest - ie dates for
international matches.
REGIONAL MEETINGS

5.     The League organises regional meetings of the clubs (the
Country is divided into 6 regions).     Such meetings are used to
update clubs on current issues and for the views of individual
clubs to be expressed to League representatives.


THE FOOTBALL LEAGUE'S REGULATIONS

6.     Football  League   clubs  are   bound  by   the  League's
regulations - the rules which govern the League's activities and
covering such areas as fixtures, match arrangements, televising
matches, finance, sponsorship, players registrations, transfers
and contracts of service, crowd control measures including local
plans and closed circuit television surveillance systems.    The
Football League, through its Management Committee, takes action
and imposes penalties against clubs which are in breach of the
regulations.    Penalties can be reprimand,    fines,suspension,
expulsion or any other course the Management Committee considers
appropriate.


ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING

7.     There is an Annual General Meeting of the full and
Associate Members of the League with Extraordinary General
Meetings organised as necessary.      Such meetings are used to
determine proposed changes to the League's Regulations - the
rules which govern the League's activities and its competitions.
Discussion is limited to the issues for determination - it is in
the sub-committees and regional groups where general debate on
current issues takes place and, perhaps, agreementreached on the
need to seek changes in the Regulations.

8.     Any resolutions put to the vote at meetings are generally
decided on a show of hands but polls, including the use of ballot
papers, are permissible.   In any vote each First Division club
has one and a half votes, each Second Division club one vote and
the Third and Fourth Division clubs have eight votes between
them.   Major issues such as the League Presidency, television
deals, CCTV at grounds and the number of clubs       in the First
Division have all been determined over the past     year or so at
such meetings.
