                                         ^ ^ M e p U - i h ^

             if>Ofi^S      6oU^\(aJ



(o-t, rVJUr*M a- w**/ l ^ '                                A


jlti^f                                                         ou^4     •


 I                ^ . u W          -Ao    /-U,


^        ^                           h=>

< v ^ 4           >v4—                    ^       '■'*- p * r < ^ , U h

fy u     *~ -U v ~ r°^ A ~               c-TU s     " ~ a ^


/w^v/tS                                       r ~ o U 't* ~ 3 ' ° * ~

/ d o ^ /           f / ^ s U ^      •


I                 e - ^ o ^          «-                 °A-    **-

       cw/        •J^Y'U 2 ' '’-         <^v«-     ‘T 0 "'"    v W v a /
                      t^yfA^.       j-c* ^ C .      *->— Ov"C- <^/\Sy°^-'
t*^/uo

f-o<~s^b'r.




     £
K. E. VIW ICOM0E                                                            v


 jt j j - ^                                        &s^ho}


f f i$       92
                                                                  REGISTRY

                                                             FILE IWo.
                                                             Df AH   >.



    ***      D.O.E.                                  H I n n s t m r y t*arg7
  I ■ TREAT OFFICIALS                                    London
       # 1 0 JAN VJiiir
        Ifa IVHrv'-'
         isrotji;',..
       retux, ; ”
                                                         1st January 1992.

Dear Mr. Major,

You may remember that in August I wrote asking for help in obtaining a
response from the Department of the Environment to a letter I had written
two months previously concerned with proposed developments by Arsenal
Football Club.

It took a further two months and another letter to the Secretary of State
before a reply was received. The thrust of this was that the central
government had simply to wait for the local planning procedure to be
completed, or an appeal to be lodged.

Locally the situation has deteriorated badly. There is now considerable
acrimony and distrust between Islington Council, Arsenal Football Club and
local residents. I am writing as one who speaks for the local community as
one of the chairpersons of the Gillespie Neighbourhood Forum, but more
particularly as the vicar of the local parish. I dm disturbed by what is
going on and am now convinced that this is occurring because of government
policy, rather than because of a spec ifid planning application.

It is for this reason that I am writing to you again at the beginning of
the crucial month when a decision of some kind must take shape. I will be
grateful if this time you do not forward my letter to a department, because
the matter is substantial and urgent. I have always believed that those who
paint on a large canvas are most accurately judged by the small brush
strokes they make.

Although we are working very hard to be heard, the local community is
dispirited and without much hope, because nobody seems to see what stares
us in the face. Arsenal has presented two schemes now for a huge new stand,
much bigger than anything else at the stadium. The club says it must be on
this scale, or they will not be able to survive financially. It is hard to
challenge this and none of us wants Arsenal to cease to exist.

Those living next to and near the ground face a transformation of their
physical environment in an unacceptable way. The streets around the stadium
are minor and the residents are just ordinary people. There are some small
council estates and the rest are terraces of late Victorian houses. We are
not the kind of people who have the skill or the resources to take on major
issues of planning, although you would be surprised at what has been
achieved. There are also a large number of people from ethnic minorities,
who simply do not understand our planning laws.
Islington Council, which should have set limits to the scale before Arsenal
went away and spent a lot of money on these proposals, continually suggests
that there are limits to what the planning authority can do. We also
suspect that a political decision has been made to keep Arsenal in the
borough at all costs.

Both Arsenal and the Council are convinced that the Secretary of State will
give the go-ahead to the better scheme, because something must be seen to
be done following Hillsborough. This will happen even if the scheme is one
which will blight the lives of local residents during and after
construction. The Council is frightened of the financial consequences of
losing an appeal. Arsenal is confident that it does not have to present a
scheme more in peeping with the scale of the area, because of the board's
conviction about the government's attitude.

If my memory is correct the Taylor Report was required because of a number
of incidents at football grounds, culminating in the horror of
Hillsborough. Its primary concern was to ensure safety rather than protect
business. I do not believe that any of you foresaw what might be the effect
on local residents as a consequence of the decision that everyone must be
seated at the major grounds by the start of the 1994-5 season.

The timetable is very tight and is likely to yield some bad planning
decisions as a result. When I spoke on the phone to one of the civil
servants responsible in the Department of the Environment he laughed at my
suggestion that the matter was one of national concern, because it was
likely to set a precedent for forty other such schemes. We know from our
contacts with other groups such as those living around Aston Villa and
Tottenham that the clubs are watching Highbury very attentively.

Arsenal continuously protests that it does not want to have to build at
all, but that the club is obliged to do so. They quite naturally want to
recoup the £20 million the redevelopment will cost as fast as possible. The
supporters do not want the terraces to go as the atmosphere will disappear
as quickly as the price of admission is likely to rise. Neither the
Council, nor the local residents want the redevelopment of the north end,
but fear there is nothing we can do to prevent it, because the decision has
really been made already.

The neighbourhood is already very forbearing and happy to continue to be
within limits. We do not realisticallly expect the government to perform a
volte-face on the Taylor recommendations, even though we are confident that
the removal of the wire fencing, together with good local policing has
already solved the main problem.
However, we are asking that the government looks again at this whole issue,
now that the actions necessitated by the legislation are having such
appalling implications for many local people.

We would like the timetable to be relaxed so that a planning decision is
not made too hastily. We would appreciate it if the clubs could be told
unequivocally that business considerations will not be regarded as more
important than the quality of life of their neighbours.


With best wishes,

Yours faithfully.,




cc Secretary of State for the Environment,
   Shadow Secretary of State for the Environment,
   The Home Secretary,
   Member of Parliament for Islington Worth,
   Chief Executive of London Borough of Islington,
   Head of Planning,
   Chairperson of Development and Control Sub-committee,
   Managing Director of Arsenal Football Club,
   Councillors Sands and Burridge,
   Neighbourhood Manager, Gillespie Neighbourhood Office,
   Group for the Alternative Arsenal Stand.
U ^ & & / \

O C ( H       o ^ / 5 -
         V



    ■'1 - •                                26-150

W :^
Wh
                            * ..   * •' --r " '




                        /
.;•V '■'
*•

\            -■

                    /

’               '

h*:-■'
         ■ •.




     i
