                                         AES



                                   â– ^SaaamenBJjjs            D E P A R T M E N T OF T H E E N V I R O N M E N T
                                                             2 MARSHAM S T R E E T LONDON SW1P 3EB
                                                                              01-212 3434

                                                             My ref:
                                                                               P / M / P S O / 41567/89
                                                             Your ref:



                                                                                     k12 FEB 1990




                                        Chris Patten            has asked me to thank you
                                        for       sending       him   a  copy   of  iMrs  Joan
                                        M c B r i e n 's    letter    about   the   death   of
                                        her      son      at   Hillsborough.      I have   now
                                        replied          to   Mrs   McBrien   and  you   might
                               /        like to have the enclosed copy.




                                                                                   j




                                                                COLIN MOYNIHAN




                                       Keith Raffan Esq MP


                     This is 1 0 0 % recycled pgpsr




Ac c y c u d P unr
                                    D E P A R T M E N T OF TH E E N V IR O N M E N T
   fcUAM
                                    2 MARSHAM STREET LONDON SW1P 3EB
                                                       01-276 3000

                                    My ref:            P /M /P S O /41567/89
                                    Your ref



Mrs J McBrien                                                             k;90


Holywell
Clwyd




As you know Mr Keith Raffan MP has sent the Secretary of State
for the Environment a copy of your letter to him of 13 November
about the death of your son John at Hillsborough last April. The
Secretary of State has asked me to reply.    I am sorry about the
delay in replying but I am sure you will appreciate that my reply
had to. take account of Lord Justice Taylor's final report on that
tragedy.

I should first of all like to pass on to you my own and the
Secretary of State's sincerest condolences on the tragic loss of
your son.  I know no one can truly put themselves in the place of
another who has suffered such a bereavement but I can appreciate
that terrible sense of loss and grief that you are feeling.

I have noted very carefully all the points made in your letter
particularly what you say about a national membership scheme for
football supporters.    The other points you have made have, I
understand, all been covered in a letter from Lord Ferrers at the
Home Office to Mr Raffan.

As you will probably know Lord Justice Taylor concluded that he
could not support a national membership scheme because he did not
believe that the technology would work well enough to avoid the
danger of congestion and disorder.     The Government has always
made it clear that it would not implement the scheme until it had
given full consideration to Lord Justice Taylor's final report.
In the light of his report we have decided not to proceed with
the establishment of the Football Membership Authority which
would have had the responsibility for drawing up arid implementing
a detailed scheme.

Lord Justice Taylor recommended an alternative strategy for
combatting football hooliganism including the creation of new
offences specifically related to football, the use of attendance
centre orders and electronic tagging of offenders.           The
Government will be looking carefully and quickly at all of these
suggestions and the proposed national membership scheme has
therefore been put on the back burner.

I can assure you that the Government recognises that the vast
majority of those who go to football matches are decent, law
abiding people who simply want to watch a match in comfort and
safety and return home in the same way.       Unfortunately there
remains a minority who go to football who appear intent only on
spoiling the enjoyment of others.     It was to deal with these
people that we were considering introducing a national membership
scheme and which the alternative strategy now being considered is
designed to address.

To complement such measures we share youy'view, however, that it
is also essential that the facilities for spectators are greatly
improved.   Lord Ferrers' letter referred to the Government's
support for all-seater stadia and you may know that the
Government now intends to use the Football Licensing Authority,
subject to consultation, to require all-seater stadiums in all
Football League grounds by 1999, as recommended by Lord Justice
Taylor.

I am sending a copy of this letter to Mr Raffan.




                                       COLIN MOYNIHAN
