K H .5.14/SEMNOTE.DM

                                        cc   Mr Eolton

Mr Goddard
F8



1.   In the course of a seminar which I attended last Friday I
spoke informally to Mr Sandford of the Football League who was
interested to know the Home Secretary's reaction to the
meeting with the Football League last Tuesday.

2.   I said I was not privy to the innermost thoughts of the
Home Secretary and others.  I said my impression had been that
he had been very concerned about the Bournemouth incident,
about the failure to move the fixture and that police "advice"
should be taken on such matters.  As far as I kn^w he was, I
said, re-assured by the League's undertakings to follow police
advice.

3.   Mr Sandford said the League were meeting Mr George of
ACPO to establish arrangements by which the League fixture-
list would be cleared with the police before the start of the
season.  He hoped that they would be able to work through ACPO
if particular fixtures were perceived by individual Chief
Constables as potentially difficult.  (I think he wished to
avoid the situation whereby the League were constantly having
to adjust the fixture list at the whim of individual chief
officers).

4.   As a participant at the Tuesday meeting Mr Sandford was
not able to take a note of it.  He asked if he could have a
copy of any note prepared in the Home Office.  I undertook to
pass on this request.




                                        D J MOULD
                                        G2 Division


                                        14 May 1990
