 DEPARTMENTAL REPORT 1992



 Football Hooliganism


     Although the Department still retains an interest in
measures to combat football hooliganism at home and when English
teams play abroad the main responsibility for this work has been
transferred to the Home Office. A number of measures have been
introduced in recent years including close circuit television,
improved police tactics and powers,the control of alcohol
consumption at matches and on travel to and from grounds which
have resulted in improved spectator behaviour. In the 1990-91
season arrests at Football League grounds fell by 31% following a
fall of 3.9% during 1989-90. The Department and the Home Office
will be working closely with other government departments,the
football authorities and the police on the arrangements for the
European Championship Finals in Sweden in June 1992, to minimise
the risk of trouble amongst England supporters who travel to
Sweden.(May have to be deleted if England do not qualify for the
Finals - will know in November 1991.)



Improvement of football around facilities


     The Government's objective is for all grounds in the first
and second divisions of the Football Leaque to be all seater by
August 1994 and those in the third and fourth divisions by August
1999. The Football Trust on which the Department has observer
status administers the funds arising from the cut in pool betting
duty announced in the 1990 Budget and allocates them to
individual clubs on the basis of their needs and resources.
During 1990-91 the Trust approved total grants of £10,589,000 in
respect of aggregate costs of over £43m for major projects at 12
football grounds.


     The Department and the Home office are discussing with the
Football Trust,the Football Licensing Authority and the football
authorities the development of a strategy for the implementation
of all seating which will ensure that available resources are
allocated to clubs on the basis of need, expenditure on major
projects represents good value for money and the Government's
objectives on all seating are met.




                                                               2
