 Our Ref:   QPE/89 52/3/129 (S)




Thank you for your letter of 5 September to Colin Moynihan
enclosing correspondence from!   ^          1 in connection
with the Coventry City v Everton rootball match on 19 August.

Liverpool City Council wrote on 23 August to Coventry City
Council (the licensing authority for the Highfield Road
ground) and West Midlands Police (who police matches there).
      °omPr®hensive replies enclosed, explain the many steps
which have been taken to implement Lord Justice Taylor's
interim recommendations, and they comment in detail on the
specific complaints made about the match.

Whilst it is accepted that conditions both outside and inside -
the ground were at times crowded, it is refuted that there was
severe crushing or that lives were put at risk. Nevertheless,
improvements have been made to increase the throughput of the
turnstiles for the future.

It is understandable that, following the tragedy at
Hillsborough, anxieties are more easily aroused when anv
congestion or delay occurs while large numbers of spectators
are being admitted to grounds, even if conditions are in fact
S je ’ s^fety of spectators now receives increased attention,
and the Government will consider with care
Lord Justice Taylor's final conclusions.

Mistakes were made at Hillsborough - by the police and by
others. Nevertheless, many officers made valiant efforts to
rescue the injured and to save life that day. Determined
efforts are made every Saturday by all services concerned to
ensure the safety of spectators at football matches.




David Alton Esq MP
 _        reaction is understandable, but I would encourage
him to reconsider his attitude to the police, who continue to
serve the public well and professionally, often in difficult
and demanding circumstances.




                           FERRERS
