                              CONFIDENTIAL




PS/Mr Moynihan


cc:   PS/Secretary of State
      PS/Lord Hesketh
      PS/Sir T Heiser
      Mr Owen
      Mr McDonald
      Mr Lee (o/r)
      Mr Rock
      Mr Newsom


LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR'S FINAL REPORT - STATEMENT ON MONDAY


I attach draft Q and A briefing for Monday's statement, on the
national membership scheme. If the Minister is content, we will
let the Home Office have the briefing tomorrow. We have confined
our questions to the national membership scheme, since other
issues are primarily for the Home Office. They will in turn let
us have their Q and As on Friday and we will put up the whole
package then.




NEIL KINGHAN
SARD


24 January 1990
                          CONFIDENTIAL




LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR'S FINAL REPORT
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS



1.   Isn't this a major climb down by the Government?

No. The Government has always said that it would take account of
Lord Justice Taylor's recommendations.  I have made it clear that
the Government does not intend to repeal Part I of the Football
Spectators Act. The effect of today's decision is not to proceed
immediately to establish the Football Membership Authority with
the remit to draw up a scheme.   The Government will explore Lord
Justice Taylor's concerns about the operation of a membership
scheme in the light of advice from the specialist companies who
responded to the ITT on 19 January.




2.   Does the Government accept that the national membership
scheme would not only fail to stop hooliganism but could in
itself be dangerous?

No national membership scheme exists.      Lord Justice Taylor's
comments are based on his consideration of the invitation to
tender documents prepared for the football authorities.      The
arguments advanced in the report were all discussed during the
Bill's passage through Parliament and we have reservations about
the conclusions which the judge has drawn.    For that reason we
propose to continue to explore how to meet his concerns.

If pressed;   The Government is not convinced   that    a safe   and
workable membership scheme cannot be devised.




3.   How do you propose to carry the scheme forward?

The Department of the Environment will initiate discussions with
the football authorities and the specialist companies as soon as
possible with a view to devising an effective and tested
membership scheme in case it should prove necessary to introduce
one.   The Government has always made it clear that it would not
introduce a scheme until it was satisfied that it was safe and
workable.
                          CONFIDENTIAL




4.   Doesn't Lord   Justice   Taylor   say   that   testing   would   be
dangerous?

It is the view of the Government, the football authorities and
the specialist companies that such testing can be, .carried out
safely.




5.   Will the Government reimburse the football authorities for
the costs already incurred?

No.    The football authorities and the Department of the
Environment agreed to fund the development work jointly.   The
football authorities were fully aware that Lord Justice Taylor
was due to report.

[Department of the Environment paid Â£132,225 - half the costs up
to Royal Assent]




6.   Surely the measures proposed by Lord Justice Taylor are
either already in effect or previously ruled out as unworkable?

Some elements of Lord Justice Taylor1s recommendations are
already in force.    The Government hopes to build on these in
carrying forward the full package.       We share Lord Justice
Taylor's view that a move towards all-seater stadia and better
discipline among players would contribute substantially to a
reduction in football hooliganism.
