                                   Department of the Environment
                                   Room     P3/165
                                   2 Marsham Street London SW 1P 3EB
                                   Telex 22221 Direct Line 01-276 Q g y g

                                             Switchboard 01-276 3000
                                                        GTN 276


R Rhodes Esq
Home Office
F8 Division
Rm 533
50 Queen Anne's Gate                                                August 1990
LONDON SW1H 9AT




TAYLOR REPORT: NEW OFFENCES

We reported to the Minister for Sport the main decisions of your
Ministers on 24 July concerning the proposed new offences.    He
has raised two points on which I would be grateful for your
advice.

First, he has commented that when any announcement on these
proposed new offences is made he would like to add his support to
the statements made by Lord Justice Taylor in chapter 1 of the
final report concerning the role of club management in enÂ­
couraging good behaviour by supporters and on the importance of
discipline being maintained on the pitch (paragraphs 54 to 56). I
know that any such announcement is some way off but I would be
grateful if you could give me an idea of when you expect it to be
made. Such an announcement would also be relevant to the section
of the review of sports policy concerning measures to tackle
spectator violence.    I would also be grateful if you could
confirm, assuming the announcement does not make these points
anyway, that there would be no difficulty in our Minister adding
to his support for the proposed new offences these further
observations on the importance of discipline on the pitch and on
the role of club management in encouraging good behaviour by
supporters?

Secondly, the Minister has asked if he could see a demonstration
of evidence - gathering techniques at football grounds similar to
the one laid on for the Home Secretary by the Metropolitan Police
Public Order Training Centre at Hounslow.      Is it feasible to
arrange such a demonstration and how best can this be organised?


Yours sincerely




A R BADEN
Sport and Recreation Division
