hs.10.17/hillsbl4.dm

INFORMAL MEETING WITH THE HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY
17 OCTOBER 1989 1430 HOURS


BACKGROUND BRIEFING MATERIAL



HOME OFFICE ROLE


The perceived role of the Home Office in securing sports grounds
safety is now two fold:


     (a)    to create the legislative framework to secure
     reasonable safety at sports grounds (ie the Safety of Sports
     Grounds Act 1975 (the 1975 Act))?


     (b) to produce associated guidance to sports grounds and
     local authorities used by the public in any sizeable
     numbers.

Up 1.1.88 the Home Office was also the appellate authority
between local authorities and clubs in disputes over safety
certificates.   From 1.1.88 the appellant function was moved to
the courts.   Appeal is now to a Magistrates' Court.     This is
consistent with the appeal provisions under the Fire Precautions
Act 1971 (the 1971 Act).

SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT

Safety certification


The 1975 Act follow broadly the recommendations of the Wheatley
Inquiry (Command 4952).     See Home Office written evidence
paragraph 1.

Safety certification is not identical to the Wheatley idea.   That
inquiry drew a parallel with licensing,    envisaging an annual
licence following inspection    and   rectification   of   the   most
obvious ground defects.

Annual certification was also recommended by the Popplewell
Inquiry (recommendation 9-1 of the Final Report).

The present system

Safety certification is the means to specify the requirements and
to control the number of people allowed into a ground
commensurate with its condition at any given time.            The
authorised capacity can be adjusted in line with work done and
the changed conditions.   The 1975 Act is structured accordingly.

In common with fire certification it provides a continuous form
of control.


Unlike a fire certificate, a safety certificate can, in theory,
be issued from the day of designation. In practice at least some
remedial work is agreed between club and local authority prior
to the issue of the safety certificate (paragraph 26 of Home
Office written evidence).


Annual Renewal

In the above circumstances annual renewal is not considered any
great advantage.   Arguments are summarised in the Home Office
consultative document paragraphs 2.40 - 2.45.


Annual Inspections

Section 10B of the 1975 Act (as amended by section 25(1) of the
Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987 places a
statutory duty upon local authorities to arrange the inspection
of designated sports grounds at least once a year. Combined with
the continuous control of the safety certificate itself and the
emergency powers under section 10 of the 1975 Act (as amended by
section 23 of the 1987 Act) should provide local authorities with
enough enforcement powers.
Enforcement

We have limited information about prosecutions under the 1975
Act. We know of 3: West Hall, Aston Villa and Wembley.    (ACC
evidence states that only a handful of prosecutions have taken
place.)

Similarly we have no detailed knowledge of the number of
prohibition notices issued under section 10 of the 1975 Act. We
are aware that some such notices have been issued. The numbers
appear to be small - which is not surprising given that all
football league grounds except one are designated as requiring
safety certificates.

Comment: Reasons for the above may be that football grounds are
not wilful in their non-compliance with safety requirements and
that authorities prefer to work together with clubs rather than
opt for prosecution. The threat of issue of prohibition notices
may also be an effective way of achieving results. [Possibility
that Sir Peter Taylor may suggest that absence of action may also
be an indication that local authorities are not using the powers
available to them.]

Inconsistency and National Inspectorate

ACC evidence draws attention to different arrangements within
different counties.     (AMA evidence has not been seen.)
Metropolitan district councils will probably have a different
method of approach.

Abolition of the GLC and metropolitan counties meant devolution
of the 1975 Act's functions to the metropolitan districts in the
relevant areas.

Some inconsistency is probably inevitable.   But this may to some
extent be attributed to:

     (a)   different conditions and configuration of grounds?
     (b) the different uses of the grounds and their authorised
     capacities ?

     (c)    the nature of the crowd (some grounds attract
     traditionally a more troublesome crowd than others);

     (d)   the perceived quality of ground management.

National Inspectorate:     The present legislation follows the
Wheatley principals - delegating responsibility for certification
to local authorities.       Popplewell judged that it worked
satisfactorily (Final Report chapter 3-4, 3-23, 3-69).

The Football Spectators Bill makes provision for the new national
licensing authority (FLA) to take on a supervisory role. This
provision is contingent upon the inquiry's conclusions in its
Final Report. The FLA is limited in its scope to those grounds
at which designated matches (ie designated under the Bill) are
played.

GREEN GUIDE

Status -

We understand that the inquiry has set up a small working group
to consider which parts of the guide should be made mandatory (if
any) and to consider some of the technical advice in the guide.


The guide is currently a voluntary code - again following the
principals of the Wheatley Inquiry (para. 51 of the Wheatley
report). This approach was endorsed by Popplewell (chapter
3-48 of the Final Report).


Use of the Guide

The guide is not intended to be a design brief for new stadiums.
It is aimed as securing safety at existing sports stadiums. It
is still orientated towards football stadiums but has, we
believe, application to other sports grounds.
Requirements to secure reasonable safety at an individual ground
still rest with those assessing the ground.     That is why the
guide is voluntary and (in our view) should be applied flexibly.
It attempts to take into account that, perfection cannot be
achieved within existing grounds many of which are run down and
poorly located.


Planned Changes

Minor adjustments to the guide were under consideration at the
time of the Hillsborough accident following comments from the
ACC. We had also agreed to include more guidance on first aid
provision.   Adjustment to chapter 16 paragraph 226 is also
necessary:   the example on page 67 needs adjustment because
barrier spacing cannot be achieved given the terrace dimensions
quoted. It is also clear that there are other ways in which the
Guide can be improved to improve presentation and clarity.

Technical Annex - Appendix E of the Popplewell Final Report:
Defensive Briefing

Considerable effort was made to implement sensibly all of the
technical recommendations of the working group set up by
Popplewell. One or two of the recommendations, mainly involving
further research, have not been put into effect. Mostly these
were because the research ideal did not stand up to serious
scrutiny.   The following items are those on which we may be
vulnerable.

PeGmmnendation 2:   Production of Summary Documents etc

The   Institution   of   Structural  Engineers    is   producing
supplementary advice to engineers. This was seen as a sufficient
follow up to the recommendation. Home Office are represented on
the Institution's sub-committee.
Recommendation 5:    Self-contained Section on Good Safety Design

The early paragraphs of chapter 1 of the guide makes some attempt
at this. But the guide is not a new design brief - a point which
sometimes did not appear to be appreciated by the Popplewell
technical working group.

Recommendation 14/32: Review of the testing of crush barriers
with local authorities

In fact Mr Stickley has met and/or spoken to a number of local
authority representatives as well as engineers employed by
football clubs. He also serves on the ISE's sub-committee (see
above) which consists of both private and public sector
engineers.

Home Office letter of 3.10.86 to local authority associations
accompanying the revised green guide sought suggestions for an
on-going consideration of the guide or supplement to it:
particular emphasis being placed on local authority knowledge of
crush barriers' strength, test loading etc.      We have had no
response on this point.


Recommendation 23:    Study of Exit Signposting


The revised guide, paragraph 5.7 refers more closely to British
Standards for which, FSI agreed was sufficient.

Recommendation 25/2 6: Relationship between packing density and
emergency evacuation and possible casualties which might be
attributable to the former

The first of these recommendations was not implemented because
the relationship referred to does not, so far as could be
ascertained, exist. The second recommendation involving further
study was felt to be of limited value.     We already know the
consequences of high packing densities; to attempt a worthwhile
study of casualties which might be attributable to high packing
densities seemed to have little mileage given the local
variations in the crowd numbers which could exist at any time.
â€¢Recommendation 42: Assessment of the Evacuation of a Stand under
Emergency Conditions

This was an idea put to SRDB whose views were that the earlier
studies carried out by Scicon remain sufficiently valid and,
following further enquiries by SRDB of the Medical Research
Council and the Civil Aviation Authority no additional material
was unearthed. The point was not therefore pursued.

Recommendation 52:   Standard Guidance covering the use of Public
Address Systems


Separate research on evacuation management (in the case of fire)
has already been taken up by the Department independently of the
Popplewell report and forms part of the future research
programme.


Pitch Fences

Two issues arise here:

     (a)  all pitch fences provide some sort of impediment to
     forward movement onto the playing area in an emergency. All
     therefore require some form of emergency exit if the pitch
     is to be used in an emergency. The adequacy of the exits
     therefore is linked to the numbers of people authorised to
     occupy the space behind the fence.

     (b)   collapsible fencing can itself be unsafe if spectators
     can lean on it. In this event, the guide advocates that the
     fence should be as strong as a crush barrier since it is
     being used for the same purpose.   Collapsible fencing is
     only likely to be safe if the crowd are set back from the
     fence.  Whether grounds have sufficient space to achieve
     this is not known.
