From: Keir Hopley                  cc   Mr   Clayton
      F8 Division                       Mr   de Quidt FLA
      Ext. 2367                         Mr   Baden SARD
                                        Mr   McPherson SHHD
      5 February 1992                   Mr   Webb



Mr Peters

REVIEW OF THE FOOTBALL SPECTATORS (DESIGNATION OF FOOTBALL
HATCHES IN ENGLAND AND WALES ORDER) 199 0

Thank you for your minute of 28 January requesting comments on
your suggestion that Berwick Rangers should be undesignated
for the purposes of the Football Spectators Act 1989.

 2.   As you know, designation for Part I of the 1989 Act also
 applies to the restriction order provisions in Part II of the
 Act. Undesignating the home matches of Berwick Rangers and
"the other non-FL clubs who currently play at designated
 grounds would have the effect of preventing the courts from
 imposing restriction orders for offences committed whilst at
or on the way to games at these grounds.

3.   Our preference would for the courts to retain the power
to impose restriction orders for offences committed in these
circumstances. However, I recognise that the FLA would face
practical difficulties in issuing licences for these grounds.
Therefore, I agree - reluctantly - that they should be deleted
from the new designation order.


Designation of other matches

4.   I understand that you are reconsidering the wording in
paragraph 18 of the draft submission circulated under cover of
your note   of 14 January.

5.   As I explained in my note of 17 January and in our
subsequent telephone conversation, we would have strong
objections if the revised designation order did not include,
for the purposes of the restriction order scheme, all games
involving PL or FL teams played at their home grounds or at
other major sporting stadia. In particular, the order should
include the following types of matches:


      (i)   European friendlies between major clubs not covered
            (eg Arsenal v. Benfica, Spurs v Celtic); and
                   *      Â«




     (ii)   testimonial matches involving PL or FL teams.

Role of the Police


6.   The only other thought I have to offer on the draft
submission is that it slightly misrepresents the role of the
police in the scheduling of matches. The police have
expertise to advise on the likelihood of public disorder and
the consequent risk to spectators. They have no expertise on
safety matters per se. I suggest that the last sentence of
paragraph 7 of the submission might be re-drafted along the
following lines:


      "Under the current order such a match would require
      a licence unless police recommendations about the
      likelihood of serious public disorder and consequent
      risk to crowd safety required the game to be played
      elsewhere.11


7.    On the same lines, the reference to police
recommendations about safety and order in the last sentence of
paragraph 16 should be replaced by "police recommendations
about public order".


8.   I am, of course, willing to discuss this further if you
wish, but I shall be in Sweden next week. If you require any
further information in my absence please contact Vivien Pugh
on ext 2698.



                              KEIR HOPLEY
