                         DEPARTMENT OF NATIONAL HERITAGE


                          SPORT AND RECREATION DIVISION
                               SANCTUARY BUILDINGS
                                GREAT SMITH STREET
                                  LONDON SW1P 3BT
                               FAX NO:   071 925 6934
                                 URGENT FAX MESSAGE



TO:     Smi£ &t££
ORGANISATION:              O ff>C E

FAX NO:


FROM:        % ~rf         G&O

TEL:        3C60 - 6 3 5 *)                       R00M N0:
DATE:        4.-&-qZ                              TIME:   /2./0

COPIES TO:           _____________________________________




SUBJECT:         A .l         fro T B    Cbrtrt'Ti& b
NO OF PAGES (INCLUDING THIS ONE):             ^

MESSAGE:


        4
       -^




            /* • aM
     I think the advice in the Planning Policy Guidance is more
helpful than your Report suggests. As well as asking local
planning authorities to give sympathetic consideration to
development proposals designed to achieve all seating it takes up
a number of other points mentioned in the Taylor Report. It
suggests that local planning authorities might wish to consider
initiating a dialogue with clubs where they know they are
thinking of relocating and that county councils might find it
helpful to convene a forum of local planning authorities where
proposals may have an impact beyond district boundaries. Local
planning authorities are also asked to have regard to the extent
to which proposals incorporating multiple use and non-football
use will be of benefit to the community as a whole.

     So far as the Green Belt is concerned the Planning Policy
guidance rightly makes clear,as you point out,that very special
circumstances would be needed to justify setting aside the
presumption against inappropriate development. However it does
also suggest that these requirements may be met if all other
practicable options for location have been exhausted and all
other considerations have been addressed.




                                                                    1
