                    0 C   IW i vv-fXJc_

Mr tfhalley


INQUIRY COSTS
I have forwarded to you separately an estimate of the costs of
the Inquiry. I am making arrangements through Finance Department
for the necessary funds to be acquired and Finance Department are
currently seeking Treasury approval to engage in spending on the
Inquiry's expenses.

2.   I should mention that the total cost of the Inquiry will,
for the time being, have to be met from the existing Home Office
cash limit. It is believed that a supplementary estimate may be
submitted later in the year (for the Inquiry and for other
purposes) but the Finance Division view is that an estimate of
expenditure of Â£1,177,000 is not sufficient in size to warrant a
supplementary estimate in its own right.

3.   It follows that, currently, all departments of the Home
Office are being called upon to make a contribution to the
Inquiry's costs. Contributions have been provided from the
budgets of Mr Moriarty, Mr Chilcot, Mr Faulkner and Mr Hyde.

4.   Because the present estimate was prepared so early in the
Inquiry's life it seems almost inevitable that, with further
experience, we shall come to believe that adjustments should be
made to it. I propose therefore to review the estimate with you
in early July. In advance of this, I should be grateful if you
could arrange for a note to be kept of actual, and expected
expenditure. Because Finance Division have not yet persuaded
budget holders to release funds to cover the whole of our initial
estimation of expenditure, it may be necessary for them, in a
couple of months' time, to seek further contributions unless our
estimate of costs for the Inquiry is significantly reduced.




                                          F J ARCHER
G1 Division
8 May 1989
