h s .12.8/hillsb29.dm



Mr Bolton



HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY INTERIM REPORT:   TWERTON PARK

Avon County Council telephoned in response to your letter of
6 December.   The main purpose of the call was to ask if the
question of the capacity cut should be considered urgent enough
to convene a special public protection sub-committee (or full
committee) meeting before the Christmas/New Year fixtures; or
could it wait until the next scheduled meeting on 18 January
1990.    I said it was up to them:       but that the Inquiry
recommendation was "urgent‚Äù, intended to be put in place by the
start of the season ie last August, and that I could not advise
thejpg^re anything other than immediate consideration of
implementation of it.

2.   Two further questions were put.    First, the timing of the
Final Report.    I advised that we thought about the middle of
January was most likely.    The second point was whether a Home
Office official would be willing, if necessary, to address the
sub-committee or full committee. I did not rule this out, saying
that I was personally always willing to offer assistance if at
all possible. I added however that I was unsure of the propriety
of an official from the Home Office attending/addressing elected
council members and would need to take advice.       The council
officials may come back on this if they are asked by their
elected members.




                                         D J MOULD
                                         G2 Division


8 December 1989



FEP/89 35/48/122
