                                                               r~â€”
                          CONFIDENTIAL




PART IV - THE FOOTBALL SPECTATORS ACT 1989


1.   CONTENTS OF INVITATION TO TENDER (ITT) (CH.13)

The judge recognises that the scheme does not exist even in draft
form but goes on to criticise the concept of the scheme on the
basis of the contents of the ITT. He says that the ITT was
prepared by Ernst and Young "in conjunction with DOE1. Comment:.
It was not. It was prepared on the instructions of the football
authorities' working party. It was not agreed with us. It is not
a secure basis on which to judge the national membership scheme
that could be achieved.


2.   DANGER OF CONGESTION AND DISORDER (CH.15)

a)   Present risk of congestion (paragraphs 380-381). The judge
implies that congestion is a common problem now, as a result of
inadequate turnstiles and late arrivals. Comment. In fact
congestion occurs only at a small proportion of matches.

b)   Additional time to check cards (382-396). The judge regards
the target set in the ITT of an additional second to check each
card as crucial but he is sceptical that it can be achieved,
given the procedures needed at the turnstiles and the fact that
there is no comparable scheme in existence, subject to large
crowds, bad weather etc. He was impressed by GEC's demonstration
but appears to discount it on the grounds that it was carried out
in perfect conditions.
Comment. This is a serious pre-judgement. The suppliers may be
able to achieve the target. They      may produce a scheme which
allows the spectator to "swipe" his own card (the GEC approach).
The fact that a scheme succeeds        in good conditions    isnot
evidence that it will fail in bad. More turnstiles can also help.

c)   Computer reliability (397). The judge quotes ACPO's anxiety
about this and endorses it. Comment. This again is pre-judgement,
ACPO's evidence was given before the ITT was even issued.

d)   Emergencies (400). The judgecriticises the Act      for not
spelling out how computer failures or other emergencies are to be
dealt with. Comment. As he also says, this can be spelt out in
the scheme and, in our view, should be.

e)   Testing (401-9). The judge is doubtful that testing at two
clubs, as envisaged, will be adequate because it may not test
fully (1) potential problems with     the technology; or (2)   the
determination of hooligans to bust    the system. Comment.   Hedoes
not understand how technology is tested (nor does he seem to have



                          CONFIDENTIAL
                           CONFIDENTIAL



listened to much expert advice). The consultants are confident
that technological problems can be simulated. The extent to which
hooligan behaviour can be tested is a matter of judgement. Ours
is that a test is likely tobe subject to the      most determined
attempts to disrupt it. More generally, if the first tests were
not convincing, we would have some more.

3.   WILL THE SCHEME WEED OUT HOOLIGANS? (CH.16)

a)   Inside grounds (411-414). The judge's view is that the
prospects of the scheme's success in eliminating hooliganism
inside grounds are seriously flawed by our recognition that the
photograph on a spectator's card will not be checked on entry
(because of delays). Hooligans could therefore gain entry by
using stolen or borrowed cards. He quotes ACPO in support of his
view. Comment. We have never claimed that the scheme will end
hooliganism in one fell swoop. It will take time but, as the ACPO
quote implies, the photograph on the card will be a major factor
in the deterrent process.

b)   Outside grounds 415-419. The judge rejects our argument that
hooligans banned from attending matches will give up going to
them. He says that the Luton precedent is not relevant because it
bans away supporters and we do not. Comment. This is a matter of
judgement; it seems to us that if football hooligans aredenied
football matches as the focus    of their hooliganism, they v/ill
lose interest, if not at once, then before long.

4.   POLICE RESOURCES (CH.17)

The judge argues tha-): the scheme will add significantly to the
numbers of police needed at football grounds, at least initially,
to deal with "problem cards". He quotes ACPO comments about
problems with computers at Manchester United as evidence of the
potential increased demand. Comment. The argument is confused.
The ITT proposes that only cards which register invalid should
lead to apprehension of the card-holder and these should be very
few in number, especially initially; malfunctioning cards would
be confiscated at the turnstile. Stewards could be used to take
the holders of invalid cards to an interrogation centre, where
the police would consider whether an arrest should be made. ACPO
had not seem the ITT.

5.   THE JUDGE'S SOLUTION (CH.18)

He proposes:


     (i )   Developing the detection and evidential potential of
            CCTV and the new National Football Intelligence Unit;




                           CONFIDENTIAL
                            CONFIDENTIAL



      (ii)   Prohibiting, by creating criminal       offences,       three
             specific activities in the ground:

             (a) throwing a missile;

             (b) chanting obscene or racialist abuse;

             (c) going on the pitch without reasonable excuse;

      (iii) Extending the courts' power to make attendance centre
            orders, in conjunction with exclusion orders, for
             football related offences on occasions of specified
            matches so as to keep hooligans away from football
            grounds;

      (iv)   Using electronic   monitoring   (tagging)   for   the    same
             purpose.


Comment.

(i)     is already happening.

(ii)   would mean the creation of new offences specific to sports
grounds but each of these forms of behaviour can lead to
prosecutions now. The problem lies in establishing evidence and
the attitude of magistrates' courts.

(iii) would be new; attendance orders are only used in respect
of under-21 year olds at the moment. But, in the body of the
report   (paragraphs   326-334)    the   judge recognises  the
administrative complexity of handling all convicted offenders
whenever a relevant match is being played.

(iv)   would also be new and could be a helpful way of checking
that convicted offenders do not breach exclusion orders. At
present, the Home Office is still experimenting with tagging on a
limited scale.




                            CONFIDENTIAL
PART V - FINAL RECOMMENDATIONS

No mention is made of the national membership scheme in the final
recommendations.  Of those which are included the following are
of most interest to DOE:


All-seated accommodation - Chapter 2 paragraphs 61-94,
Recommendations 1-4

The Judge recommends that all grounds designated under the Safety
of Sports Grounds Act 1975 (and thus sports grounds other than
just football grounds) should, by 1999 be all-seater and that all
1st and 2nd Division grounds should be all-seater by 1994.
Comment: We welcome moves towards all-seater stadia and amended
the Football Spectators Act to empower the FLA to make
recommendations on the seating of spectators. We had in mind the
gradual move to all-seater stadia in 1st Division and at selected
grounds outside 1st Division. The Judge goes very much further.
Is it necessary for all 3rd and 4th Division clubs and indeed
minor rugby clubs for instance to be all-seater by 1999?    There
are no recommendations on how these developments are to be
financed. The Judge does not see this as his task but "it can be
argued there is a case for financial assistance (from Government)
if not by direct subsidy then by some tax reduction". The
Government has made clear that costs are for football to find.
To implement the recommendations in full at football1s expense
could   place   a  considerable   financial   burden   on  clubs,
particularly the smaller ones and in other sports, like rugby.


Advisory Design Council - Chapter 2 paragraph 96 Recommendation 5

The FA and the League should set up an Advisory Council to offer
advice to clubs on planning ground improvements.        Comment:
Acceptable.   Such a body would perform a useful function and
provide the means of pulling together research in the field,
including that undertaken by the Sports Council.


Safety Certificate Review Body - Chapter 3, paragraphs 154-156,
Recommendation 6.

The Judge recommends that the remit of the Football Licensing
Authority (FLA) in respect of Safety Certificates should be
expanded to cover all grounds designated under the 1975 Act, and
not just football grounds as provided for in the Football
Spectators Act. He also recommends that regulated stands at
undesignated grounds and indoor premises should be covered.
Should Part I of the Act not be implemented or delayed the same
functions should be given to another suitably constituted body.
Comment: If most of Part I of the Act is not to be implemented
then new legislation to establish a body to take on the FLA's
proposed safety responsibilities might in any event be required
and the opportunity could be taken to expand its powers.
Detailed Safety Recommendations - Chapter 4, paragraphs 158-242,
Recommendations 7-22

None of these raise matters of interest for this Department and
the Home Office say they might   all be incorporated in safety
certificates.


Mandatory requirements for safety certificates - Chapter 3,
paragraphs 141-149, Recommendation 24.

The Judge proposes that it should be mandatory for safety
certificates to specify i) the maximum numbers of spectators to
be admitted to the stadium, its different parts; ii) details of
entrances and exits, and the requirements they should meet; iii)
details of crush barriers.      Comment: This is largely a Home
Office matter, although we have an interest in view of the FLA's
proposed safety responsibilities. The Home Office are content
subject to considering whether it is necessary to specify the
maximum number of spectators to be admitted to different parts of
the stadium.


Safety of Sports Ground Advisory Group - Chapter 3, paragraphs
152-153 and Recommendation 31.

The Judge broadly repeats his interim recommendation for an
adivsory group to be set up to advise each relevant local
authority on safety certificates and to include representatives
of all three emergency services and the building authority as
will as local authority staff.    Comment:   The Home Office are
broadly content although they will have to consider whether the
group should include representatives of the ambulance service.


Closed circuit television - Recommendation 35

Closed Circuit television should be installed to monitor crowd
densities.  Comment: Acceptable we have pressed hard for CCTV to
be extended to all League grounds as an anti-hooligan measure. It
is sensible it should have this safety function.       But is it
necessary at all sports grounds designated under the Safety of
Sports Grounds Act?


Computer Records - Recommendation 39

Clubs should consider maintaining computer records of ticket
sales.  Comment: Acceptable at league clubs but is it necessary
at all designated sports grounds?


Police planning and control - Chapter     5,    paragraphs   249-248,
Recommendations 44 to 46, 49 and 51

These are a repeat of the Judges interim recommendations with the
Judge also emphasising the need for a well equipped and well
placed police control room.   The Department has little interest
and the Home Office are broadly content.


Communications - Recommendation 54 and 55

More airwave channels, including a command channel for the Police
Commander, should be available at the ground.   Comment: For the
Home Office who while happy with the principle think there are
practical difficulties.


Medical Facilities - Recommendation 66-67

There should be at least one trained first aider per 1,000
spectators at every match with over 2,000 spectators a doctor
should be present and it should be possible to summon one
immediately at matches under 2,000, an ambulance should be
stationed at all matches with crowds over 5,000.    Comment: For
the Home Office who will wish to consider the suggested dividing
lines.


New offence to stop ticket touts - Chapter 7, paragraphs 273-279
Recommendation 70

The Judge proposes to back up his recommendations aimed at
preventing those without tickets from turning up at matches by
creating a new offence to prevent the sales of tickets for and on
the day of a football match without authority form the home club
to do so. Comment: This is a Home Office matter but it would be
administratively difficult to implement despite what the Judge
says i.e. the clubs would have to licence ticket sellers and
would discriminate against those who on the day of the match sell
a spare ticket to a friend.


Club Strategies against hooligans - Chapter 10 paragraphs 316-319

Although not included in his final recommendations the Judge
concludes in Chapter 10 that away members only schemes should be
given further consideration.   Comment: Such schemes are open to
abuse by the hooligan who could claim to be a neutral or home
supporter.    The Judge acknowledges that much would depend on
ticket allocation by the home club.   The experimental membership
scheme which failed in Holland was based on the away supporters
only concept.
