K H .9.13/HILLSDPP.DM

                                      cc   Miss Nicholson
From:     D J Mould                        Mr Moriarty
          G2 Division                      Mr Turney
          Ext 3099                         Mr Moorey
                                           Mr Goddard
                                           Mr Bolton o/r


To:     Ms Dent
        Private Office


HILLSBOROUGH: LETTER FROM COUNCILLOR CHASE ON THE DPP DECISION


1.   You asked Mr Bolton for advice and a draft reply to the
attached letter from the Hillsborough Working Party (HWP)
expressing concern about the DPP decision not to prosecute
over the Hillsborough disaster.  In Mr Bolton's absence on
leave I am replying direct.

2.   Although reaction in Liverpool, especially by friends and
relatives of the victims, may be unfavourable to the DPP
decision, we do not have all the details on which that
decision was based. The Inquiry by Lord Justice Taylor, set
up by the Home Secretary, to "inquire into the events .... and
make recommendations about the needs of crowd control and
safety at sports events" was not an investigation carried out
with a view to criminal proceedings.  In general, criminal
investigation is a police matter: prosecution decisions are
for the DPP who is accountable to the Attorney General.   It
would not therefore be right to comment on the DPP decision
but we should pass on the correspondence to the Attorney
General.

3.   It is just possible that the HWP which, I think, was set
up as a pressure group,mistakenly believes that the Home
Secretary is the Minister responsible for the DPP. The
proposed draft reply hopefully corrects any such belief.

4.      A draft reply is attached as requested.




                                           D J MOULD

                                           13 September 1990

FEP/89 35/48/106
                                                                   FILE NUMBER .....â–    ................
/       K H .9.13/HILLSDPP.DM                                             FEP/89 35/48/106

r   D R A F T LETTER

                                     HC/DT
    ADDRESSEE'S REFERENCE


     TO                                       ENCLOSURES                COPIES TO BE SENT TO


          Councillor H Chase
          Hillsborough Working P 4rty
          Chief Executive's Offic e (R.5)
          Municipal Buildings
          Dale Street
          LIVERPOOL L69 2DH




           (FU LL POSTAL ADDRESS)                                  (FU LL ADDRESSES, IF NECESSARY)


                           LETTER D R A F T E D FOR SIG N A TU R E BY
                                                                        PS to S of S
                                                                             (NAME OF SIGNATORY)

          Thank you for your letter of 6 September to the Home Secretary

          expressing your group's concern over the decision of the

          Director of Public Prosecutions (DPP) not to take criminal

          proceedings as a result of the Hillsborough disaster.



          I should perhaps make clear that decisions of the DPP are not

          matters for the Home Secretary and the Inquiry carried out for

          him by Lord Justice Taylor was not set up with a view to

          criminal proceedings.          I hope you will understand, therefore,

          that it would be wrong for me to comment on the decision of

          the DPP to whom, I see, you have written direct.                     I am however

          arranging for copies of this correspondence to be passed to

          the Attorney General who has responsibility for the Crown

          Prosecution Service (which is headed by the DPP) so that he is

          aware of your concern.




           H.O. EST. 112
