                                        d /4 a v 4 ^ - p w   f* y g Y W \A   Ife & F -   1*




Investigation into the fire at King's Cross Underground Station
                        18 November 1987




                Memorandum of Evidence by the
                         Home Office
Introduction

On 15 December 1987 the Home Office was invited to submit
evidence to the Committee of Investigation. This request was in
the following terms:


     "The Members of the Committee would be pleased to
     receive any comments the Home Office thought it proper
     to give on any matter relevant to the fire and in
     particular:


          (a) the effect of the Fire Services Act 1947
          and any relevant matter arising from annual
          inspections of the London Fire Brigade by HM
          Inspectors of Fire Services, and

          (b)   the application of the Fire Precautions
          Act 1971 to the London Underground system and
          the responsibilities imposed by that Act on
          various parties if it was applicable.‚Äù

2. This Memorandum represents the Home Office's written response
to the Committee's request. It consists of two parts: Part I
describes the general organisation of the Fire Service in England
and Wales and Part II deals with fire precautions legislation.


3. If the Committee would like further information on any point
the Home Office will of course provide it where it can.




A H TURNEY
Home Office
Fire and Emergency Planning Department
January 1988
PART I


THE ORGANISATION OF THE FIRE SERVICE IN ENGLAND AND WALES

Obligations of the Fire Authorities

1. The main relevant pieces of legislation are the Fire Services
Acts 1947-59 and the Local Government Act 1985. Under section 1
of the Fire Services Act 1947 it is the duty of every fire
authority in Great Britain to make provision for firefighting
purposes. In England and Wales fire authorities are County
Councils, and, in the former Metropolitan Counties and Greater
London, Fire and Civil Defence Authorities created by the Local
Government Act 1985. Section 1 of the 1947 Act also imposes
certain specific obligations on fire authorities, the central
being the securing of the services of such a fire brigade and
equipment as may be necessary to meet all normal requirements.
The Act also requires that arrangements are made for the
efficient training of members of brigades, for handling fire
calls and mobilising members of the brigade, the surveying of
fire risks, the mitigation of fire damage and the giving of fire
protection advice. Section 2 of the Act imposes an obligation on
fire authorities to make arrangements for mutual assistance from
other brigades where this is necessary. Section 3 of the Act
empowers fire authorities inter alia to employ their brigade for
purposes other than firefighting (eg attendance at road
accidents) where this seems appropriate.

Duties of the Secretary of State


2. The 1947 Act, as amended by the Fire Services Act 1959,
provides the Secretary of State with a range of powers in
relation to the fire service? these cover such diverse areas as
the organisation of brigade areas, fire service discipline
arrangements, appointments and promotion regulations and the
making and varying of a fire service pension scheme.
3. However, in the case of the former Metropolitan Counties and
the GLC area, where the new fire and civil defence authorities
are discharging the functions of fire authorities (see paragraph
1), under section 68(5) and section 85 of the Local Government
Act 1985 the Secretary of State is for the first 3 years of their
existence (ie until 31 March 1989) exercising controls over their
total manpower, their central administrative structures, the
arrangements they make to obtain services from other bodies, and
lastly their total expenditure (this by means of a control over
the maximum precept they may levy on their constituent
districts). These powers are designed to ensure that in their
formative years the new authorities discharge their functions
economically, efficiently and effectively (section 85(1) of the
1985 Act).

The Central Fire Brigades Advisory Council


4. The Central Fire Brigades Advisory Council, with a
corresponding Council for Scotland, was constituted under Section
29 of the 1947 Act to advise the Secretary of State on any matter
on which he is in law required to consult the Council or any
matter, except conditions of service, which may arise in
connection with the operation of the Act. The Council, which is
chaired by the Home Office Minister having specific
responsibility for the fire service, consists of representatives
of Government, fire authorities, the trade unions and staff
associations and other interested parties. The two Councils
represent the national forum for discussion in England and Wales
and in Scotland of all professional matters relating to the fire
service, except conditions of service, and are served by seven
Joint Committees of the two Councils, viz:

     (a)   Joint Training Committee
     (b)   Joint Committee on Fire Brigade Operations
     (c)   Joint Committee on Fire Brigade Communications
     (d)   Joint Pensions Committee
     (e)   Joint Fire Prevention Committee
     (f)   Joint Committee on Appliances, Uniform and
           Eguipment
     (g)   Joint Committee on Fire Research
These committees develop common standards and doctrines which
after consideration by the Councils may be recommended to the
service by the Secretaries of State. Each of the Joint
Committees in their turn may be assisted by working groups set up
to consider particular subjects. The following two working
groups may be of relevant interest to the Committee of
Investigation:

Firefighting in Tunnels


5. Following a fire in December 1984 in a British Rail tunnel in
the Pennines, the Summit tunnel, on the line between Todmorden
and Littleborough, the Joint Committee on Fire Brigade Operations
agreed at its meeting in October 1985 that a Working Group
should be established with the following terms of reference:


     "to examine available information and in the light of
     experience apply this knowledge with regard to fires
     and other incidents in road or rail tunnels and similar
     structures, including underpasses, but excluding
     pressurised workings, and to consider the issue of
     advice to fire authorities as appropriate.11


6. The Working Group was formally set up in June 1986 after
which factual information relevant to its task was sought from
Chief Fire Officers and then collated and analysed, prior to the
Group's meetings in November 1987 and January 1988. The Group is
primarily concerned with fires in road and British Rail tunnels,
but also with the tunnels of underground railway systems,
including the London system/ it has not, however, been concerned
with the concourses etc. of Underground stations. The Group is
considering the production of advice in very general terms on
those matters which should be considered by CFOs with tunnels in
their areas. One member of the Group is a representative of the
London Fire Brigade.
Technical Working Group on Breathing Apparatus


7. Because breathing apparatus (BA) was playing an increasingly
important role in firefighting, the Home Office held an
operational study on BA at the Fire Service College in April
1985. This study was considered by the Joint Committee on Fire
Brigade Operations which, at a special meeting in March 1986,
agreed to set up a Technical Working Group on Breathing Apparatus
with the following terms of reference:

     "to investigate all relevant matters raised by the
     study and subsequently confirmed by the Joint Committee
     on Fire Brigade Operations, and to examine and revise
     as necessary current BA control procedures? and to
     report back to the Operations Committee."

BA control procedures are now being considered further within the
Fire Service Inspectorate.

Fire Service Inspectorate


8.   Under section 24 of the 1947 Act Inspectors are appointed by
the Crown for the purpose of obtaining information as to the
manner in which fire authorities are performing their functions
under the Act (ie those duties outlined in paragraph 1) and other
technical matters. These powers were extended by section 29 of
the Fire Precautions Act 1971 to include inspection of fire
precautions functions. The Inspectorate serves a dual function:
it discharges its statutory remit principally by carrying out a
formal inspection of each brigade annually, supplemented as
necessary by other consultations, and secondly it represents a
source of professional and technical advice to the Secretary of
State and the Department as well as discharging a liaison role
between the fire service and the Government. In recent years the
Inspectorate's role has been broadened to encompass the
efficiency and economy with which fire authorities are
discharging their functions as well as their operational
effectiveness.
Inspection of the London Fire Brigade


9.   The last inspection of the London Fire Brigade took place on
11 to 15 May 1987 and was carried out by HM Chief Inspector and a
team of inspectors. All aspects of the brigade's activities were
examined but particular attention was given to the effect of the
major restructuring of the brigade. The Inspectorate were
satisfied that the brigade was operationally efficient and
permitted its fire authority to discharge its statutory
obligations. As is now the practice, following the inspection a
letter was sent to the Clerk to the London Fire and Civil Defence
Authority summarising the main findings.

Fire risk categorisation


10. As indicated in paragraph 1, one duty placed upon fire
authorities involves the collection of information required for
firefighting purposes with respect to the character of the
buildings and other property in the area of the fire authority,
the available water supplies and the means of access thereto and
other material local circumstances. This information is used by
fire authorities to help them determine the correct fire risk
category for each part of their area? this categorisation when
compared with national yardsticks, determines the speed of
response to fire calls in the area. There are 4 basic risk
categories, A to D, which range from areas such as city centre
shopping areas on the one hand to country areas with few
buildings and a low density of population on the other. The
national standard as a minimum requires that 3 pumps attend a
call in an A risk area within 8 minutes, the first arriving
within 5 minutes of the call. In a D risk area only one pump is
required to attend the call within 20 minutes of the alarm.
These are minimum requirements and a number of authorities make
provision for a more rapid and larger response. Outside of these
4 categories there are 2 other groups of risk: remote rural risk
involving individual buildings placed in isolated country areas
and special risk. The former is not relevant to the Committee.
The latter, which was the pre-determined risk category in the
case of King's Cross, refers to a certain area of exceptional
risk which requires a specifically tailored response different to
that of the area immediately surrounding it. The appropriate
attendance for each special risk is individually assessed: in
the case of King's Cross we understand from the London Fire
Brigade that the underground station was assessed as being a
special risk within a pre-determined A risk area and the
preplanned attendance was for 3 pumps together with a turntable
ladder. Whilst national standards are recommended by the Home
Office and normally followed by fire authorities the
responsibility for determining what provision to make rests with
the individual fire authority on the advice of the Chief Fire
Officer. The professional responsibility for the risk
categorisation of a particular area rests with the relevant Chief
Fire Officer whose task is to ensure that the risk category of
his area is operationally correct.

11. In 1985 the report of the Joint Committee on Standards of
Fire Cover, which had been set up by the CFBAC, recommended inter
alia that all fire authorities should review the risk
categorisation of their areas to take account of demographic and
other changes. The London Fire Brigade's review is expected to
be completed by the end of this year. Progress in these reviews
is being monitored by the Inspectorate.

Fire Service Training


12. The Fire Services Act 1947 places a duty on every fire
authority to secure the efficient training of members of the
brigade and empowers the authorities to establish and maintain
training centres for providing courses of instruction for members
of their own or other brigades. The manner in which training is
carried out by fire authorities and the standards maintained are
reviewed annually by HM Inspectors of Fire Services.


13. Fire authorities discharge their responsibilities in a
number of ways. They provide recruit training on courses of some
12 to 18 weeks duration, together with specialist and
continuation training. Additionally, and if time allows, there
is a training period included in each period of duty where
firefighters receive instruction on technical matters, local
risk, hazardous substances, operational procedures etc. These
training periods include practical exercises using fire service
equipment, and staff are encouraged to make decisions and to play
the role of junior officer.

14. In addition to formal training fire service staff are
encouraged to study the Manual of Firemanship which is a
comprehensive text book on all aspects of fire service
techniques. These and other studies equip staff to take the
promotion (or equivalent) examinations, success in which is a
pre-requisite for promotion to the ranks of leading fireman, sub
officer and station officer. Many officers join the Institution
of Fire Engineers in order to develop their studies further.
Local branches of the Institution often organise seminars on
particular fire risks and visiting speakers will be invited to
talk on incidents which have occurred in their particular area.
Through these further studies staff may equip themselves for the
examination for graduateship and the subsequent examination for
membership of the Institution.

The Fire Service College


15. Section 23 of the 1947 Act also empowers the Secretary of
State to establish a central training institution.   Under these
powers the Fire Service College at Moreton-in-Marsh has been
established. The costs of the College are borne by the
Secretaries of State, fire authorities pay the salaries and
travelling expenses of members of their brigade attending these
centrally run courses. The College has been constructed on a
substantial site and has excellent facilities for both practical
and theoretical training. The College houses an average of about
375 students and gives training including junior officer training
for leading firemen and sub officers (6 weeks) and junior officer
advancement courses (12 weeks) for sub officers and station
officers, together with courses to prepare officers for
divisional command (9 weeks) and brigade command (11 weeks). In
addition the College runs a wide range of other courses and
seminars designed to cater for the needs of the modern service.
The development of the fire service approach to training is
undertaken through the Joint Training Committee of the Central
Fire Brigades Advisory Councils.
PART II

FIRE PRECAUTIONS LEGISLATION

Fire Precautions Act 1971


16.  The Fire Precautions Act 1971 (1971 Act), as amended by the
Health and Safety at Work etc. Act 1974 and the Fire Safety and
Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987, is the main legislative
instrument for controlling fire safety in occupied buildings in
Great Britain. It is intended to provide for the protection of
persons from the risk of fire and its central feature is the
requirement for occupiers of premises, put to uses designated by
order of the Secretary of State, to obtain a fire certificate
from the local fire authority. Before issuing a certificate the
fire authority must inspect the premises and satisfy themselves
as to the adequacy of fire safety including the means of escape
in case of fire, the means for securing that the means of escape
can be safely and effectively used at all times, the means for
fighting fire, and the means for giving warning to persons in the
premises in case of fire. These means must be specified in the
fire certificate. In addition the certificate may impose
requirements for securing that the means of escape are properly
maintained and kept free from obstruction? that any fire fighting
equipment, fire alarms and means for securing that the means of
escape can be safely and effectively used are properly
maintained? that persons employed to work in the premises receive
appropriate instruction or training in what to do in case of fire
and that suitable records are kept? for limiting the number of
persons who may be on the premises and as to other precautions to
be observed. Where these measures are not satisfactory the fire
authority can serve notice on applicants informing them of that
fact and of the steps which would have to be taken to achieve a
satisfactory standard of fire precautions to enable a fire
certificate to be granted.

17.  Under section 1(2) of the Act a use of premises can be
designated if it falls within at least one of the following
classes of use: as, or for, any purpose involving the pro\Lision
of sleeping accommodation? as, or as part of, an institution
providing treatment or care? for purposes of entertainment,
recreation or instruction or for purposes of any club, society or
association? for purposes of teaching, training or research? for
any purpose involving access to the premises by members of the
public, whether on payment or otherwise? or as a place of work.


18. Although the Act provides for a wide range of uses to be
designated it was recognised that the burden certification would
impose on fire authorities and those to be certificated meant
that a policy of selective designation would have to be followed,
having regard to the classes of occupancy which had given rise to
significant fire casualties. Two designation orders have so far
been made under the Act. The first order came into operation in
1972 applying the Act to hotels and boarding houses providing
sleeping accommodation for more than 6 persons or for any number
of persons above the first floor or below the ground floor. The
second order, the Fire Precautions (Factories, Offices, Shops and
Railway Premises) Order 1976 (S.I. 1976/2009) came into operation
on 1 January 1977 applying the Act to factories, offices, shops
and railway premises.


19. It was the intention of the 1976 designation order that the
fire certification requirements of the 1971 Act should be applied
as nearly as possible to the same range of premises as had
hitherto been liable to certification under the Factories Act
1961 and the Offices, Shops and Railway Premises Act 1963. The
definitions of these premises employed in the two Acts were,
accordingly, retained in the 1976 Order.


20. Under the Order such premises require a fire certificate if
more than 20 persons are employed to work at one time or more
than 10 are employed to work at one time elsewhere than on the
ground floor. Additionally premises in a building which contains
two or more of such premises and in which the aggregate of people
employed to work at any one time exceeds 20, or more than 10
elsewhere than on the ground floor require a fire certificate, as
do factory premises, irrespective of the number of employees,
where explosive or highly flammable materials are stored or used
in or under them. Exempt from the provisions of the Order are
special high risk premises such as nuclear installations and
explosives factories where the processes are of such a nature or
on such a scale as to make fire precautions an integral part of
the control of the activities. These are dealt with under other
legislation.

21. In addition to the two designation orders applying the
certification requirements of the Act to the classes of buildings
listed above, the Act also requires a large number of smaller
offices, shops and railway premises previously falling within the
scope of the Offices, Shops and Railway Premises Act 1963, but
not subject to the certification procedure, to have reasonable
means of escape. The Fire Precautions (Non-Certificated Factory,
Office, Shop and Railway Premises) Regulations 1976 (S.I.
1976/2010) also require certain specific fire precautions to be
taken in these premises, as did the Factories Act 1961 and the
Offices, Shops and Railway Premises Act 1963.


22. Where the fire authority were satisfied that any premises,
whether designated or not, which fell within at least one of the
classes of use mentioned in section 1(2) of the 1971 Act
constituted a serious risk to persons in case of fire, they could
until 31 December 1987 under section 10 of the Act apply to the
court for an order to prohibit or restrict their use until
appropriate measures had been taken. Section 10 has been amended
by the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987 with
effect from 1 January 1988 to allow the fire authority to serve
notices to prohibit or restrict use of premises in case of
serious risk to persons whether employees or members of the
public.

23.   In the late 1970's evidence emerging from representatives of
fire authorities and the fire service indicated that there was a
need to review legislation, to close loopholes and to see whether
the current system of fire certification made best use of
available resources. After a wide-ranging debate satisfactory
proposals were agreed upon. These form the basis of Part I of
the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987 (1987
Act), which amends and adds to the provisions of the 1971 Act.
Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987

24.   The main provisions of Part I of the 1987 Act are:

      the conferring of powers on fire authorities to exempt in
      certain cases premises from the need to have fire
      certificates? the introduction of a duty on means of escape
      and fire fighting equipment, an associated code of practice
      and system of improvement notices for premises exempted from
      the requirement for a fire certificate by virtue of a
      provision made in a designation order or by the grant of
      exemption mentioned above? the introduction of a duty on
      owners/occupiers to provide a certain level of fire safety
      during the time their application for certification is
      pending? the introduction of limited charges for the issue
      or amendment of fire certificates? the introduction of a
      power for fire authorities to issue notices or prohibit or
      restrict the use of premises where there is a serious risk
      to persons in case of fire and of a duty on fire authorities
      to inspect premises at intervals to be specified in guidance
      to be issued by the Secretary of State.

25. The provisions of the 1987 Act are being implemented in
phases. Included in the first phase which came into force on 1
January 1988 are the sections relating to charges for fire
certification work, prohibition notices and the interim duty
pending the outcome of an application for a fire certificate.
The second phase which is expected to be implemented towards the
end of 1988 will bring into operation the sections relating to
exemption from the requirement to have a fire certificate for
certain low risk premises, the general duty on means of escape
and for fighting fire, the code of practice and improvement
notices. The section imposing a duty on fire authorities to
inspect premises will not be brought into effect until it has
been possible to assess the impact on fire service resources
brought about by the exemption provision.
APPLICATION OF 1971 ACT TO THE LONDON UNDERGROUND SYSTEM

26. On.e of the uses of premises designated by the Fire
Precautions (Factories, Offices, Shops and Railway Premises)
Order 1976 is that as railway premises in which persons are
employed to work. In defining "railway premises" the Order
adopts the meaning given to that expression at section 1(4) of
the Offices, Shops and Railway Premises Act 1963:

     a building occupied by railway undertakers for the
     purposes of the railway undertaking carried on by them and
     situated in the immediate vicinity of the permanent way or a
     part (so occupied) of a building so situate ...

Section 1(4) excludes offices, shops (which are within the scope
of the Act elsewhere), staff living accommodation, hotels and
certain premises used as electrical stations. There is also a
provision in section 90(1) of the 1963 Act that "building"
includes structure, except in respect of railway premises. In
sum, subject to the exceptions for certain specified premises and
the limitation to a building properly so called, the 1976 Order
is concerned with any building or part of a building occupied for
railway purposes and situated in the immediate vicinity of the
permanent way.

27. The 1976 Order and regulations which replaced the fire
provisions of the 1963 Act have no application to any part of the
permanent way of a railway. In order to bring the 1976 Order
                                        *\

into play some distinct building or part of a building, such as a
set of rooms or even one room, within the railway system must be
identified. Once identified that particular unit may contain
passages and stairways, and those features can properly be taken
into account, but the 1976 Order is not regarded as applying
directly to underground passages and stairways in their own
right.

28. The 1976 Order relates to premises in which persons are
employed to work. It is accordingly necessary to take into
consideration control rooms, machine rooms and other workrooms in
the underground system rather than the public areas where there
may be few (if any) employees, unless those areas are all parts
of the same building in which case under section 1(8) of the 1971
Act they may be treated as forming part of the premises put to a
designated use. Even if there are relevant railway premises
which can be said to be put to a designated use the requirement
for a fire certificate in respect of the premises depends, in
accordance with the provisions of article 4 of the 1976 Order, on
the number of persons employed to work there at any one time or
the aggregate of the persons employed to work at any one time in
those and other premises in the same building which are put to a
designated use under the Order, for example, as offices or shops.


29. The Home Office does not have particulars of the
circumstances of individual stations and/or of the application of
the 1976 Order to them. Three stations: Heathrow Terminals 1,
2, 3, Heathrow Terminal 4 and Seven Sisters are known to be
treated as requiring a certificate. It has no detailed knowledge
of whether applications have been made for other stations.

30. All premises to which the 1976 Order relates, whether or not
subject to certification, are subject to section 9A of the 1971
Act which imposes a duty to provide certain premises with means
of escape. This duty normally bites on the occupier of the
premises but in certain circumstances may apply to the owner(s)
(see paragraph 35). The premises include railway premises to
which the Offices, Shops and Railway Premises Act 1963 applies.
Subject to the exceptions mentioned in paragraph 26, a building
or part of a building occupied for railway purposes and situated
in the immediate vicinity of the permanent way falls within
section 9A of the 1971 Act. Under that section the means of
escape required is for the persons employed to work in the
building or part of the building, but nothing turns on the actual
number of employees present there. In determining what means of
escape is reasonable in any particular case section 9A(3)
provides that regard shall be had not only to the number of
employees but also to the number of other persons who may
reasonably be expected to be resorting to the premises at any
time.
31. The Fire Precautions (Non-Certificated Factory, Office, Shop
and Railway Premises) Regulations 1976 also provide in
regulations 5 and 6 for some further precautions, including
appropriate means for fighting fire, to be taken in those railway
premises which do not require a fire certificate. Those
Regulations again adopt the description of railway premises in
the 1963 Act and they apply to a building or part of a building,
occupied for railway purposes and situated in the immediate
vicinity of the permanent way, in which persons are employed to
work. The actual number of employees present is not relevant,
although the Regulations have no application where the number of
employees is such as to require the premises to have a fire
certificate.

32. The procedure in section 10 of the 1971 Act as amended by
the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987 for
prohibiting or restricting the use of premises where there is an
excessive risk to persons in case of fire, outlined at paragraph
22, is available in respect of railway premises. In invoking
section 1(2) of the 1971 Act in this context ''premises" has the
wider meaning given to that expression in section 43(1) of the
Act, so that it includes any permanent structure and any
temporary structure other than a movable one, even in the case of
railway premises. There is also no need to define railway
premises when considering the classes of use in section 1(2).
The two classes of use relevant to railway premises are use for
any purpose involving access to the premises by members of the
public, whether on payment or otherwise and use as a place of
work.

Responsibility for enforcement of the Fire Precautions Act 19.71


33. The main enforcing authorities for the 1971 Act are the fire
authorities. A fire authority is defined as the authority
discharging, in the area in which the premises are situated, the
functions of fire authority under the Fire Services Act 1947.
Since the abolition of the Greater London Council in 1986
responsibility for the area formerly covered by the GLC has been
transferred to the London Fire and Civil Defence Authority.   Fire
authorities are empowered to appoint inspectors for the purposes
of enforcement. They have powers for fire precautions as
required under the Act, for regulations made under it and to
enter and inspect any premises falling within one of the classes
of use specified in section 1(2) of the 1971 Act including any
place of work or premises used by members of the public. In the
case of premises presenting a serious risk they now have powers
to prohibit or restrict the use of the premises whereas
previously they had to proceed through the court.

34. We understand that the London Fire Brigade carries out an
annual fire inspection of all London Underground Limited stations
irrespective of whether they are certificated and report their
findings to LUL. Where stations are not certificated under the
1971 Act this is, however, on an advisory basis and the Brigade
have no statutory means of obtaining their enforcement except in
respect of powers given to them under the Fire Precautions Act.

35. By virtue of section 7 of the 1971 Act the occupier of
premises which are required to have a fire certificate is
normally responsible for making an application for a certificate
and for ensuring that all the requirements of the certificate are
complied with, unless the certificate imposes a requirement on
some other person. The occupier of office, shop or railway
premises is also normally responsible for ensuring that the
premises are provided with such means of escape in case of fire
as are reasonably required in the circumstances and, in the case
of non-certificated premises, for complying with such regulations
under the Act as apply to the premises. The occupier of the
premises is not, however, always the person responsible for those
matters. Where factory, office, shop or railway premises form
part only of a multi-occupied building the 1971 Act has effect
subject at present to the Fire Precautions Act 1971
(Modifications) Regulations 1976 (S.I. 1976/2007) whereby the
responsibility is that of the owner of the building or the
persons who between them own the building.
