                                                                                                    O sV ^O C A ^.
                                                > " I W s ^csWca«-=»^>
                                                  c.cWa'' r u u V U j Q = « ^
                                                ' , t u »-w   ^ i! . « i '® '   V W fc   \V ~ *_ "? > - £ * S . " *
                                                Q yu.<v<~<-*_ C=«^=»                     w      roj vtlL_




Mr.   T . Smith

P3/170

SPORTS GROUNDS

You asked me to confirm the information I gaue you by telephone this
morning, about actions taken since the Popplewell final report.

The reuised edition of the Home Office’s Guide to Safety at Sports
Grounds, the so-called Green Guide, has been published. I belieue that
it is the main reference for managers and Local Authorities.

The Institute of Building Control published a guide called "Safety of
Sports Grounds" last year. This is for the benefit of Building Control
Officers inuolued in the inspection of Grounds, and includes material
on:
     policing - including barriers, the use of pens and prouision of
means of escape to the front
     the fire seruice role — [apparently only a short section in the
guide!
     the Local Authority role - including matters likely to be releuant
to certification

1 haue asked the IBC for a copy because we do not haue one. If you
would like to see it I can pass it on, or you may want to approach them
direct on 01- 393 6860. Their address is 21 High St., Ewell, Epsom,
Surrey.

Uith regard to the Building Regulations, we are in the middle of stage
2 of the reuiew of the Regs, which is a reconsideration of their
technical content. CStage 1 was mainly about their form and
administration!.  The reuiew began long before the Bradford disaster,
but the issues raised by the Bradford fire are a part of the reuiew.

The intention is to go to public consultation on a package of new
Rpproued Documents at the beginning of next year so that they could
come into effect a few months later. CRpproued Documents are the
technical guides on ways of meeting the requirements of the
Regulations!

Ue are looking at both structural fire precautions and means of escape.
Structural fire precautions are about fire spread and fire resistance.
The Home Office/Scottish Office consultatiue document "Fire safety and
safety at sports uenues” of June *86 indicated that DoE should take
immediate action (para 2 . in the form of interim guidance on the
sub-diuision of underfloor spaces to preuent fire spread within the
stand. This was not done. It was felt that such new single storey
stands as might be built would not be constructed with a combustible
floor structure open to sub-floor uoids. Such a thing was possible, but
for a stand of any size it would almost certainly be more economical to
use non-combustible structural materials. Uoids in multi-storey stands
would be couered by existing provisions in the Rpproued Document to
regulatios B 2 , 63,8. B-*. There are no powers in the Building Regulations
 to make owners improue existing stands by subdiuiding uoids.
Revised Regulations r»ay apply requirements for means of escape in case
of fire to a wider range of buildings than at present.

Mr. Turner has also asked me to mention to you that the Institution of
Structural Engineers has a working group drafting an assessment guide
for sports ground safety,, and that he is a member of it.  The Home
Office Diuision that deals with Sports Ground safety is also
represented.



Please let me know if I can be of any further help.

Rnthony Ferguson
CID BR                                                 17.4.89

room 2*106 Millbank Twr.
217   -1*189



cc. Mr.Fuller
    Mr.Turner
