Mr Vaughan

HOME OFFICE SUBMISSION ON TAYLOR REPORT: RECOMMENDATIONS FOR NEW
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES

1.   The creation of a ticket touting offence is to be welcomed
subject to the arrangements which were referred to in paragraph 7
for unwanted tickets to be sold back to the club    on the day of
the match.
             I




2.   On the proposed offence of throwing a missile at a football
match no doubt we have to accept the advice that although covered
by the Public Order Act 1986 it is almost unenforcable at present
given the difficulty of proving, that the missile was thrown
"within the hearing or sight of a person likely to be caused
harrassment, alarm or distress." Under the proposed new offence
it would be sufficient merely to show that a missile was thrown
at a football match.


3.   I would suggest that we express severe reservations about
the proposed new offence of chanting obscene or racialist abuse.
There will clearly be difficulties in (a) defining what is meant
by obscene or racialist     (b) proving the guilt of any one
individual, and (c) attempting to arrest what could be the
majority of supporters at a football match. Although the problem
of effective enforcement    is explained in the   submission no
solution to it is offered.    It seems to me to be bad law to
create a new offence knowing full well that it is likely to be
extremely difficult if not impossible to enforce.


4.   Given that Taylor recommended lowering the level of
perimeter fences and in some cases such fences have been removed
altogether, there must be a strong case for creating a new
offence of pitch invasion.      We have already had one major
                                                          /

incident at the end of last season resulting from the removal of
perimeter fences (Newcastle United v Sunderland on 16 May). I
would suggest, however, that if the offence is to be enforcable
the defence of   "reasonable excuse" must not be allowed.     The
wording of paragraph 25 of the submission might     therefore be
strengthened to make clear that as well as recommending this new
offence the Home Office are also recommending that the only
defence should be "fear of personal safety or illness."

5.   Resource difficulties clearly militate against the extension
of attendance centre orders in the way recommended by Taylor. We
would therefore support the Home Office recommendation.


6.   Electronic tagging would be an extreme measure to be used
against football hooligans and likely to be politically conÂ­
troversial.   The Home Office proposal seems to be that there
should be no move towards specifically identifying football
hooligans as targets for electronic tagging but rather leave it
to the Courts to decide whether it would be appropriate to use
this measure under the proposed curfew order powers.   If this is
a correct interpretation of paragraph 40 of the submission then I
would suggest we would be content.          (


7.   If you agree with my reservations on the new offence of
chanting obscene or racialist abuse you might consider consulting
our lawyers for their advice.




 \.



A R BADEN
SARD C
RM P3/165
276 0675


17 July 1990

cc. Mr Lee
      Mr Ellingford
