                                           c       C v V iA U w d .'T - i'
                                                                                   /


                        Mr Lee


                        MEETING WITH THE FOOTBALL AUTHORITIES ON PLANNING ISSUES
                        MONDAY 4 JUNE



                        You, Mr Baden, Mr Coles and Mr Newsom were present when Mr
                        Moynihan met Mr Kelly (Foobball Association) and Messrs
                        Stott, Sandford and Williamson (Football League).

                        Mr Moynihan explained that the PPG note on Sport and
                        Recreation was still being drafted. He hoped that it would be
                        issued for consultation before the end of July and he very
                        much hoped that the Football Authorities would respond. The
                        Minister stressed that in his view, multi-purpose stadia
                        would become increasingly popular. Many local authorities
                        would be persuaded to suppsrt planning applications for new
                        stadia if the community would also benefit from the
                        facilities.

                        Mr Sandford expressed the opinion that many football clubs
                        would have no alternative but to refurbish grounds in the
                        light of Lord Justice Taylor's report. This would mean either
                        building upwards or outwards. Mr Sandford asked that LAs
                        might be encouraged to give sympathetic consideration to such
                        requests. Alternatively, if clubs decided to relocate, it
                        would be helpful to gain the LPA's support for appropriate
                        and financially viable deals to be negotiated for the use of
                        the original grounds.

                        The Minister urged the Football Authorities to encourage
                        clubs, wishing to redevelop or relocateyto establish early
                        links with the LPAs. The coverage of local plans would be
                        increasing over the next few years and it would be important
                        to highlight,where appropriate/possible areas for new stadia.
                        He also confirmed that new stadia would not be exempted from
                        the controls over the development of the green belt.

                        In response to further questioning from Mr Sandford, the
                        Minister agreed to include a reference in the PPG note to the
                        effect that where local plans are already in place, LPAs
                        should bear in mind Lord Justice Taylor's timtetable and that
                        there should be advice on whÂ«6h authority to approach where
                        the location of grounds straddled more than one local
                        authority area.

                        Mr Sandford asked whether the Minister would be happy to
                        offer advice in situations where the local authority was
                        blocking proposals for stadia. As a planning Minister this




R ec y c le o P ap er
would be difficult. Mr Moynihan therefore suggested that
clubs should be encouraged to seek advice from Regional
Offices.

There was some discussion about the possible application of
the UDC concept to certain situations. The Minister confirmed
that this was a non -starter, though clubs who wished to
relocate within an existing UDC area, would certainly be well
advised to make contact with the UDC officers.

Two other points were raised. First, Mr Stott said that a
seminar was planned for early August to discuss Lord Justice
Taylor's recommendations. Mr Moynihan said that although he
was planning to be on holiday, he would certainly ask
officials to attend the meeting to provide information on the
range of grafts available to clubs.

The Minister was also asked about the progress being made by
the Home office on the establishment of the FLA. He promised
to make enquiries and to convey to the Home Office the view
of the Football Authorities that the reduction in the numbers
standing on the terraces should not apply at the start of the
season (given that there was no obvious progress on the FLA)
but that the end date for completion of all seater stadia
would remain the same ie. the process should be telescoped.
I suggest that this last issue could be handled at official
level. It is however important that the Football Authorities
are appraised of progress on the FLA as a matter of urgency.




Teresa Vokes
PS/Mr Moynihan

6 June 1990

cc: Srr $sse&ald
    Mr Coles

    Mr Newsom
