                          POLICY IN CONFIDENCE                    G\
                                                                     \
                                                                                        005/07/A
                                                                    P    rivy   C   ouncil   O   ffice


                                                               W H I T E H A L L . , L O N D O N S W I A 2 AT




                               V A /A S *7     t   t'v v f


                                 os cipjYv           <\{e                           3 July 1992

                PS / AAv. K   (ty j     A.-U   p tv H U




TICKET TOUTING IN RESPECT OF FOOTBALL HATCHES

Thank you for your letter of 26 June proposing the introduction
of a Bill to prohibit ticket touting in respect of football
matches.

I do not challenge the proposition that, in an ideal world, it
vould be worthwhile to legislate in this way, especially given
the history of our response to the Taylor recommendations and Sir
John Wheeler's Bill.     But the reality is that, in present
circumstances, there is simply no possibility of accommodating
even the very short Bill you propose. I grant that the delay in
the Maastricht Bill has meant that we have been under somewhat
less pressure in the Commons in recent weeks, but that period is
now over:    we have only two working weeks until the Summer
Recess, and face what is potentially a very busy Parliamentary
programme when we resume in October.    All our major Bills have
to come forward then, and we will also have to re-start the
Maastricht Bill when appropriate. I have consulted my business
management colleagues and we agree that there can be no question
of adding to the programme the Bill you propose, or any other
non-essential items which colleagues may put forward.

I am copying this letter to the Prime Minister, members of LG
Committee, David Mellor, First Parliamentary Counsel and Sir
Robin Butler.

                                                                           -




                                                             TONY NEWTON


The Rt Hon Kenneth Clarke QC MP
Home Secretary
50 Queen Anne's Gate
London SW1
