               HOME OFFICE
               Queen Anne’s Gate London SW 1H 9A T                                2 0 - 8 . AH

                                              Direct line 071-273 2 3 6 7
                                             Switchboard 071-273 3000



                                                                 Your reference
        A R Baden Esq
        Sport and Recreation Division             O ur reference
        Department of Education and Science
        Elizabeth House                           Date
        York House
        London
        SE1 7PH                          19 August 1991




        SPORTING EVENTS (CONTROL OF ALCOHOL ETC.) ACT 1985

        I understand that the Football League have asked the Minister
        for Sport to consider an amendment to the controls on the sale
        of alcohol at football matches.  The Football League are
        suggesting that the order exempting clubs from the prohibition
        on the sale of alcohol should require renewal only every 12
        months rather than every 5 months as at present.  As the
        responsibility for the relevant legislation, the Sporting
        Events (Control of Alcohol etc) Act 1985, falls to the Home
        Office, I thought you might find it helpful to be kept in
        touch with our latest thinking.

        Under section 3 of the 1985 Act, the sale or supply of alcohol
        at licensed premises inside grounds is prohibited unless the
        licensee or club secretary has obtained an exemption order
        from a magistrates'’ court. Section 4 of the Act provides that
        the duration of such an exemption order should be 5 months.
        The Act gives the courts powers to revoke the order at any
        stage and the police powers to close bars if they believe that
        the sale of alcohol there is detrimental to the orderly
        conduct and safety of spectators.

        We recognise that the clubs may be inconvenienced in having to
        return to the courts every 5 months to seek renewal of their
        exemption orders, and the fact that renewals have been granted
        fairly readily suggests that there might not be difficulty
        were the interval extended to 12 months.   In principle,       {
        therefore, I would be fairly sympathetic to a proposal for
        change.   (I should say, of course, that that is my view; I
        have not consulted Ministers here.)

        There might be practical difficulties, however, in effecting
        the change.  First, the attitude of the Opposition is
        uncertain - during the passage of the Bill, the Government
        reduced the interval for licence renewal from 6 to 5 months in



S 363
order to gain Opposition agreement, though their attitude
might have moved on since 1985.
Second, I should be concerned to ensure that a relaxation in
control of alcohol should not be seen as a weakening of the
Government's resolve to combat hooliganism in which
restrictions on the availability of alcohol have played a
major part.  On the other hand, the proposed change could be
seen as being in line with the recommendations of both Taylor
and the Home Affairs Committee that spectators should be
treated rather better than they are at present.

Third, and most important, the change would require primary
legislation to amend section 4(1) of the 1985 Act and I see no
vehicle for its introduction.  The Government's legislative
programme is, as you know, already very congested and I should
find it difficult to make any convincing argument for priority
for a small measure whose prime objective was to make life
easier for football clubs, albeit that there might be a
welcome slight reduction in the workload of magistrates'
courts.

In summary, therefore, I could hold out little hope for the
Government's changing the law as proposed.  But, of course, if
the League were able to persuade an MP well placed in the
ballot to introduce a simple one-clause Private Member's Bill,
we should of course be very prepared to consider that on its
merits.




                          KEIR HOPLEY
order to gain Opposition agreement, though their attitude
might have moved on since 1985.

Second, I should be concerned to ensure that a relaxation in
control of alcohol should not be seen as a weakening of the
Government's resolve to combat hooliganism in which
restrictions on the availability of alcohol have played a
major part.  On the other hand, the proposed change could be
seen as being in line with the recommendations of both Taylor
and the Home Affairs Committee that spectators should be
treated rather better than they are at present.

Third, and most important, the change would require primary
legislation to amend section 4(1) of the 1985 Act and I see no
vehicle for its introduction.  The Government's legislative
programme is, as you know, already very congested and I should
find it difficult to make any convincing argument for priority
for a small measure whose prime objective was to make life
easier for football clubs, albeit that there might be a
welcome slight reduction in the workload of magistrates'
courts.

In summary, therefore, I could hold out little hope for the
Government's changing the law as proposed.  But, of course, if
the League were able to persuade an MP well placed in the
ballot to introduce a simple one-clause Private Member's Bill,
we should of course be very prepared to consider that on its
merits.




                          KEIR HOPLEY
