                    A




                              From:     T A Ellingford
                                        SARD C
                              Date:     QQ   September 1991

Mr Baden
                         EURO STADIA '91
1. I attended the open forum on 12 September arranged by the
Football Stadia Advisory Design Council (FSADC) in conjunction
with the Football League's Euro Stadia '91 held at the NEC
Birmingham.
2. The morning session was chaired by Geraint John and involved
the FSADC1s Architects' Working Party plus Jim Frogatt an FLA
Inspector who is also an architect. The main issues covered
were:-
a)   Comfort and quality of seating against cost and need to
     maintain around capacities. The general view of the panel
     was that comfort and quality were more important but there
     would inevitably need to be a certain amount of compromise.
     Jim Frogatt said that the FLA would be concerned about
     quality and standards for spectators and an American
     architect said from the floor that in the USA they tended to
     opt for more expensive seats on the basis that in the long
     term they gave better value         for money.    A police
     superintendent who looks after Chelsea said that the
     standards for seating in the Green Guide are inadequate.
     Chelsea had reduced their standard for proposed new seating
     when they realised that it exceeded the Green Guide
     requirements. He said that this had implications for crowd
     control but did not go into detail.

b)   Income to football clubs: A banker from the USA said that,
      as in the USA, football clubs should maximise their sources
      of   commercial    income  in order to      finance   stadia
      development. This could be done through providing a wider
      range of facilities and by the sale of naming rights for
      parts of grounds. In the USA naming rights had been known to
      attract income upwards of $500k per year. Several speakers
      from the panel and the floor felt that British clubs were
      already well into commercial exploitation and Rangers FC
     were quoted as having commercial income of £5.6m out of
     total income of £11.8m.

c)   Amenities and general comfort:      Archie Kershaw   (NFFSC)
     stressed the importance of comfort. The FLA man said that
     the provision of amenities and their standards would be of
     concern to the FLA and in time may be covered in their
     licenses although not in the first licenses to be issued for
     1992-93. Geraint John said that future FSADC publications
     would cover toilets, PA systems and roofing.



                                                                1
d)   Crowd control and behaviour: Joe Ashton MP asked about the
      possibility of using Perspex fencing (as he claimed they do
      in Rome) and the use of containers lowered into position by
      crane before each match (as he claimed they do in Utrecht)
      for crowd segregation. Perspex was dismissed by the Panel as
      being useless when it rains while the containers idea seemed
      to leave people not a little non-plussed as to what it was
      all about and how it worked. Another speaker felt that CCTV
      with its certainty of detection and all seating would
      militate against bad behaviour while another felt it was
      crucial to improve the behaviour of supporters rather than
      to incorporate design features in stadia which sought to
      counter hooliganism.
e)   Re-location: It was suggested from the floor that more clubs
      should consider re-location. The panel responded by pointing
      up the difficulties ie it was easier for small clubs to re­
      locate, timescale was a problem in meeting Taylor deadlines,
      there might be transport problems (lack of public transport,
      more private cars). Re-location would be easier if the new
      stadium catered for multi-use and good co-operation with the
      LA was essential. The FLA said that they had asked clubs
      about their proposals for re-location.

3. The afternoon session was chaired by Simon Inglis and the
panel comprised six FLA Inspectors plus Chief Executive John de
Quidt. The main points raised were:-
a)   Safety certificates: The varying requirements of different
      local authorities and within local authorities often caused
      problems. The FLA inspectors had been visiting local
      authorities and appreciated the need to bring more
      consistency to the whole process. The FLA would be seeking
      to achieve greater consistency through advice and persuasion
      but noted that they had reserve powers on the content of
      safety certificates although they would only use these as a
      last resort. They felt that all those with an interest in
      safety eg fire service, building regulations, police and
      supporters should be part of the certification process. A
      representative from the LB of Hounslow said that the London
      Safety Committee, on which all LBs are represented} had
      produced a draft standard safety certificate. (This was also
      being done in the North West) . He felt it would be helpful
      if the FLA produced a draft standard certificate. The FLA
      said that they would be issuing guidelines on the completion
      of certificates but they did not consider it appropriate to
      produce a standard.

b)   Police manning and charges:     The Secretary of Nottingham
      Forest said that increases of between 150-200% in police
      costs were likely as a result of the move towards charging
      full costs. He also said that practices on charging and
      police manning levels varied between authorities. He asked
      that the FLA take up this issue. John de Quidt first made it
      clear that the FLA had no remit on policing but then said
      that they might consider it appropriate to have a 'quiet

                                                                 2
     word' with the relevant Chief Constable if they felt in any
     particular case that police manning was excessive. The FLA
     re-iterated the now standard line that good well trained
     stewards were the key to reducing police manning levels and
     costs.
c)   All seating: A representative from Humberside CC asked the
      only question on all seating which was how long would clubs
      promoted to the second division in 1992 and 1993 be given to
      achieve all seating. John de Quidt said they would have 3
      seasons from the time of their promotion but that all clubs
      should be making plans now to go all seater.
d)   Attitude of clubs to safety: A representative from
     Manchester City Council felt that many clubs did not
     recognise safety as a major issue and asked what the FLA
     would do in respect of clubs which had a poor attitude to
     safety. The FLA said that they would be asking all clubs for
     a statement of their safety policy. It was agreed that clubs
     need to improve the project management of their grounds and
     Adrian Titcombe (FA) explained that the FA are to run
     courses for stadium managers in conjunction with ILAM.
     Adrian also mentioned the apparent conflict between the
     need to meet the all seating targets and the need for the
     FLA and the FSADC to produce sound guidance and advice on
     ground improvements. Simon Inglis said that a balance had to
     be struck but pointed out that tight deadlines did much to
     motivate clubs to take action.
e)   GM Vauxhall Conference:    Peter Hunter, Secretary of the
      Conference, asked the position of his clubs in relation to
      the FLA. John de Quidt replied that the FLA remit extended
      only to League clubs.




T A ELLINGFORD




                                                                3
