     HOME OFFICE
           G2 DIVISION
 Fire and Emergency Planning Dept
Queen Anne's Gate London SW1H 9AT
          Tel; 071- 273 3 3 ^ d ,
          Fax: 071-273 3964
        With Compliments




             fj&i
             Fire. Dont give it
*   hs.1.23/conf1.rjm


    From:    R J Miles                      cc   Mr Turney
             G2 Division                         Mr Peters
             x3322                               Mr Vaughan, DES

              23 January 1992


    1.      Mr Roberts
    2.      Miss Wilkinson



    "SAFETY IN NUMBERS" SEMINAR 27/28 JANUARY
    After Lord Ferrers withdrew from giving the opening address to
    this seminar the organiser, Mr Alan Smith of the Institute of
    Leisure and Amenity Management, invited the Home Secretary to
    open the proceedings.  Miss Murray wrote expressing regret that
    the Home Secretary was not able to accept and offering that an
    official might attend and give the opening address, namely
    myself.
    Mr Smith has taken up this offer and I propose to present the
    enclosed address which has inevitably been prepared in some
    haste. This copy is for your information and in case Ministers
    wish to be advised on how this matter has been resolved.




                                            R J MILES


    Enc
hs.1.23/speech.rjm


SAFETY IN NUMBERS SEMINAR - 27 JANUARY 1992


OPENING ADDRESS BY ROGER MILES, G2 DIVISION

I am delighted to be here this morning. I was told only a few
days ago that I was to stand-in for Earl Ferrers, my Minister at
the Home Office, who has responsibility for safety at sports
grounds.

In footballing terms, I was not even on the 'subs' bench when
I got the call to speak today.  It was more like a Roy of the
Rovers story of a lad at home getting a call from the local big
club to bring his boots because he is playing at 3 O'clock.
Unfortunately, this is not a Roy of the Rovers sudden glory tale,
I am no Ryan Giggs nor any other bright new find. At my age how
could I be?

I fear I shall not begin to fill Earl Ferrers boots. He is the
skipper, a very accomplished speaker and in great demand for
functions such as this.     The Gary Lineker of the speaking
circuit.

I shall consider myself fortunate to last the full time - only
45 minutes in this case.   Obviously, at my age I am only fit
enough to play one half.

More seriously, I do welcome the opportunity to make this opening
address.   The theme of the seminar is the safety aspects of
stadia and crowd management - a matter of great concern to the
Government and to me especially as Head of the Division
responsible for safety at sportsgrounds matters.


[The role of other bodies]

I see from the programme that sessions will cover the views of
local authorities, the FLA, the Football Trust, the police and
others. All of these bodies have a role to play in ensuring that

                                1
football grounds become a better, safer environment in which
spectators can enjoy the sport. For my part, I should like to
concentrate on how we in the Home Office see things.

As we all know, over the years there have been tragedies and
disasters involving spectators at sporting events. Unfortunately
many of these have taken place at football matches.

Many people think disasters involving spectators are a relatively
recent phenomena. Of course this is not the case. Even as long
ago as Roman times there were some horrendous disasters. There
were deaths from crushing and asphyxia in the large crowds which
gathered for their games. There were also deaths from runaway
chariots or crashes.

Nor were the hooligan problems which so plagued football a few
years ago anything new. Again in Roman times history tells us
that marauding bands sporting the colours of their chosen
champions would wreak havoc during the days and nights of the
games, causing untold deunage.

But we don't need to go back as far as the Roman times for
examples of spectator disasters. The good old days of watching
football, within the memory of our older citizens, were not quite
as good as we may have been led to believe.


[20th century disasters]


Our Chairman today, Mr Inglis, mentions in his 1983 book on "The
Football Grounds of England and Wales" that pitch invasions and
unruliness were far more commonplace around the turn of the
century. Fans frequently assaulted players, referees and their
own clubs' property.

Nor were these 'good old days' spared their spectator disasters.
One of the major football tragedies in modern times was at Ibrox
Park Glasgow. NOT, as many of you here may be thinking, in 1971
when 66 people died - but in 1902 when Scotland played England
and part of a stand collapsed.       The Ibrox management had spent


                                 2
large amounts improving their ground. They built a huge wooden
stand behind the west goal but on the day it could not withstand
the strain of the number of people who occupied it and the rear
section collapsed. 26 people fell to their deaths and over 500
were injured.   I understand that following this disaster large
wooden stands were banned - an early example of radical action
being necessary to prevent further disasters from occurring.

I am sure that many of you here are familiar with the disasters
that have occurred in recent years and what the responses of
successive Governments have been to them.     For people who may
suggest that this Government's response to the Hillsborough
disaster has been somewhat over-zealous it is useful to note that
such radical action is often necessary.

Following the disaster at Ibrox Park in 1971 when 66 people died,
and the subsequent report by Lord Wheatley, the Safety of Sports
Grounds Act 1975 was brought into force.    This made the major
breakthrough of determining that certain larger stadia - now
known as designated sports grounds - required a safety
certificate to be issued by the local authority. Up until this
time control of safety standards at sports grounds was effected
largely on a voluntary basis.

Following the fire at Bradford in 1985 when 56 people were
killed, and the subsequent inquiry by Lord Justice Popplewell,
the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987 was
brought into force.     This determined that certain stands at
smaller sports grounds should also require safety certification.


The Heysel disaster in 1985, which caused the deaths of
35 people, was followed eventually by the Football Spectators Act
1989. This was intended to introduce the Football Membership
Scheme under which only "members" would be admitted to watch
Football League matches.

Following   the   Hillsborough   Stadium   disaster   in   1989   when
95 people died, and the subsequent inquiry by Lord Justice



                                  3
Taylor, it was decided not to introduce the Membership Scheme.
However, other aspects of the 1989 Act were brought into force,
namely those concerning the establishment of the Football
Licensing Authority. The FLA was set up primarily to enforce and
monitor the conversion of all Football League grounds to
all-seater   in   compliance   with   Lord   Justice    Taylor's
recommendations.

[The role of the Green Guide]

In addition to the introduction of these pieces of legislation,
the Home Office Guide to Safety of Sports Grounds, known to us
all as the 'Green Guide', has been revised and updated in
response to the disasters that have occurred.

The Guide was first published in 1976 and was based largely on
recommendations made by Lord Wheatley's inquiry.   It has since
been twice revised to reflect the recommendations of both the
Popplewell and Taylor Reports. However, its primary purpose is
still to guide the assessment of safe spectator capacities.

Following the Taylor Report the main changes made to the Green
Guide included:

     a.   a new chapter on consideration for spectators with
          disabilities;


     b.   expanded advice on ingress, including use of turnstile
           flow-rate calculations as a factor in determining
          ground capacities;

     c.   a revised test procedure for crush barriers, guardÂ­
          rails and hand-rails, together with more detailed
          advice on their inspection;


     d.   guidance     on   first       aid,   medical   and   ambulance
          provision;




                                    4
      e.   additional   advice   on   stewarding   and   management
           responsibilities.

The revised edition of the 'Green Guide' was published in
November 1990, following consultation with local authority
associations and others.

The Green Guide remains non-statutory but it does provide good
advice.  Although it does not receive the headlines that some
aspects of Government policy on sports ground safety do, it is
an important part of that policy. Our information is that its
guidelines are followed and that it is generally well regarded.

However, it would appear that the conditions which still exist
at some sports grounds require further action to be taken to
ensure that the reasonable safety of spectators is secured.


[Changes in Britain since World War 2]

When discussing the safety of spectators in sports grounds and
reviewing the advances that have been made, it is helpful to
consider changes that have occurred in the country as a whole.
Since the end of the Second World War when I was just a small boy
in baggy short trousers, a bit similar to those currently worn
by the Spurs team, there have been dramatic social changes.


The standard of living enjoyed by the majority of people has gone
up.    Televisions,   video recorders   and washing machines    are
commonplace in many households today.

Life expectancy is now much higher. We appear increasingly to
be a nation of fitness fanatics and healthy eaters. The public's
awareness of how fit they are and what they eat has never been
greater.

Many people now expect to get much more from life than their
grand-parents did.    There are far more opportunities for people
to live in nice homes in an area of their choice.    The amount of
time spent on leisure and the facilities for doing so have


                                 5
increased hugely.    Opportunities for travel have multiplied.
I doubt that in the 1940's we would have been expecting well over
5,000 spectators from England to go to Sweden to watch a
competition like the European Championships.

In addition, public safety is afforded a far higher priority than
in the past. There has been a wide range of legislation such as
the Fire Precautions Act 1971 and the Health and Safety of Places
of Work Act 1974 which give people and property greater
protection from the dangers of fire and other hazards than ever
before.


Even the public services, seen by many of their critics as the
last bastion of inefficiency, are being required through the
'Citizens Charter' to become more accountable and cost effective.
Passengers may soon be entitled to compensation for the late
arrival of trains. Patients can expect to have to wait no longer
than two years for an operation. Who knows - in years to come
audiences such as yourselves may even be entitled to compensation
from boring speakers!


But one area where very little has changed, until very recently,
is in the quality of our major sports grounds.  Many of these
were built between 50 and 100 years ago and in their day were
much admired. Many of them were indeed ahead of their time in
terms of engineering achievement.


Our Chairman, in his book "Football     Grounds of England and
Wales", identified that responsibility for the shape and form of
many of our football grounds can be attributed to an engineer and
architect from Scotland - Archibald Leitch.    It would not
necessarily be surprising that one man can have had so much
influence over the way our football grounds look today, were it
not for the fact that he died in 1939 - over 50 years ago.

Naturally there have been some major developments in sports
ground design since that time - the cantilever stand built at
Hillsborough in 1961 and the rebuilding of Ibrox Park in the
1980's are two of the notable developments.


                                6
However, many of our grounds have been developed piecemeal over
the years.   Indeed it is widely recognised that in terms of
facilities and safety - if not in style and tradition - we have
been overtaken by other countries and left some way behind.
Expectations of what is a suitable venue for public entertainment
have changed as other things have changed. What may have been
acceptable 100, 50 or even 10 years ago, may not be suitable now.


[Problems with our football grounds]

Lord Justice Taylor was very critical of the standard of many of
our major sports grounds both in terms of safety and of the
facilities and amenities provided. You will all be familiar with
his comments concerning the prevailing stench of stewed onions
and the provision of prison type fencing. It is not my intention
to repeat what he said about the state of our football grounds
but to address the issue of what has happened to improve matters
and whether enough has been done.

Even in the short period of five months between Taylor's Interim
and Final Reports being published, two incidents took place at
football grounds which were of sufficient importance for them to
be mentioned in the Final Report.


At Coventry City, on the first day of the 1989/1990 season, there
were complaints about congestion and crushing in the street
outside the ground as queues built up at the turnstiles.   (See
paragraph 165).    Correspondence which Home Office officials
received about this incident showed that it had been caused by
ticket holders and non-ticket holders being required to move
through the same turnstiles. I understand that once the problem
had been identified it was dealt with. Before Coventry's next
match a ticket booth was installed away from the turnstiles so
that tickets could be purchased by spectators before joining the
queue for the turnstiles.

The other incident identified in the Taylor Report occurred at
Middlesborough in December 1989. (See paragraph 166.) There was
a crushing incident at the away end of the ground which was


                                7
occupied by Leeds supporters. The layout of the crush barriers
in this section of the ground, and the fact that the capacity of
the pen was slightly exceeded, resulted in two crowd surges that
went all the way from the back of the pen to the front. These
resulted in some distress among those standing at the front.
This situation was complicated by the fact that there were no
gates in the perimeter fence leading directly from the pen onto
the pitch.   Once again our correspondence shows that the club
responded promptly by installing additional crush barriers and
gates in the perimeter fence.

My reason for recounting these two incidents is not to point the
finger at the clubs involved nor to make an issue out of
incidents that were dealt with promptly and effectively once they
had been identified. I am merely trying to illustrate that only
8 months after the Hillsborough Stadium disaster a further two
incidents had occurred that were of sufficient seriousness to
merit the Home Office receiving correspondence about them and for
Lord Justice Taylor to refer to them in his Final Report.

No matter how vigilant ground management and local authorities
are, there is always the possibility of an incident occurring
that places the safety of some or all of the spectators in
danger. It is not possible to achieve total safety at a sports
ground - we are all aware of that.     What we must strive to
achieve is a situation where the risks to safety are minimised.


Lord Justice Taylor was horrified that even after Hillsborough
he still found complacency among the directors at several clubs.
Some even informed him that :

" Hillsborough was horrible - but, of course, it couldn't have
happened here."

The message given loud and clear by the Taylor Report is that
although the operational errors that took place at Hillsborough
occurred at just one ground and on one day - the lesson should
be that it was not a freak occurrence.   The potential for such



                                8
a disaster to happen again could exist at any ground. I can't
put it any better than Lord Justice Taylor himself who said :


"Complacency is the enemy of safety".

[What has happened since the Taylor Report]

In August 1989, Lord Justice Taylor produced hisInterim Report
which made 43 recommendations aimed at preventing any further
disaster and improving safety in the short term.

On 4 August 1989 copies of that Report were sent to allFootball
League clubs and local authorities. The accompanying Home Office
Circular urged that where possible its recommendations should be
implemented as soon as possible. 28 of the recommendations were
earmarked for implementation before the 1989/90 football season
began.


Thus even before Taylor's inquiry had been completed, both ground
management and local authorities were able to get on with the
task of implementing the key recommendations. A survey carried
out by the Home Office during September 1989 showed that the vast
majority of these 28 recommendations had been implemented prior
to the start of the 1989/1990 season, or shortly thereafter.

The Final Report of the Inquiry was published in January 1990
and contained a total of 76 recommendations.   Many of these were
concerned with specific requirements relating to safety standards
at sports grounds. As I mentioned earlier, the 'Green Guide' was
revised, in accordance with Taylor's recommendations.   The Guide
was sent to all Football League clubs and local authorities with
advice that it be implemented, where appropriate, at all grounds.


[Further reports]

The Home Office continues to receive reports of incidents that
occur at sports grounds where the safety of spectators could have
been placed in danger. Often these incidents are reported in the
national press, but not always.     I am mindful that what one


                                9
person regards as a crush or a dangerous situation may not
necessarily be so. However, there is a need for all of us to be
aware that such incidents do occur no matter how safe a ground
is considered to be.

These incidents range from too few turnstiles being available to
admit the spectators in time for the start of the match to
congestion in the gangways after a match has finished. Whilst
attention to safety standards has increased since Hillsborough,
so too has the public's awareness of what constitutes a dangerous
situation.   Many people are no longer willing to stand on an
overcrowded terrace or fight for a place in the queue to leave
the ground. The public now expect more from an afternoon at a
football match.


Only two weeks ago [Spurs v Aston Villa] there was a widely
reported incident at one of our major grounds where several
hundred spectators were still queuing up for their tickets after
a match had started and many did not get to their seats until
half-time.   It was reported that this situation did not arise
because these spectators had arrived at the ground late but
because the club's arrangements for spectators picking up tickets
which had been purchased over the telephone were inadequate.
Whilst the incident did not threaten the safety of any spectators
it could have done if impatient fans had tried to push to the
front of the queue.

According to "The Guardian" one member of the box office staff
told an annoyed customer - "You don't have to come here, you
know".  I appreciate that this was the comment of one employee
in one situation, but it is not the sort of attitude that should
exist two years on from the Taylor Report. Whilst improvements
in the way that supporters are treated have been made at many
clubs this is one example of an attitude that unfortunately
regards a football supporter as a nuisance rather than a paying
customer.




                               10
[Facilities and amenities]

It is not only safety standards that are of concern but also the
standard of facilities and amenities that exist in our football
grounds. A recent study conducted on behalf of "The Independent"
newspaper focused on a range of sporting events last year and
looked at the provision and quality of facilities.     The study
awarded marks out of ten for service; ease of access; view;
quality of facilities and value for money.

Of the eight events visited by the journalist two were football
matches, and they received the lowest markings.       Indeed the
report was particularly scathing about the view from the terraces
at one ground as well as the quality of the toilets and
refreshments.

We are well aware that the vast majority of League clubs are
either in the middle of, or about to embark on, very costly
redevelopment programmes for their grounds. However, there was
more to the Taylor Report than a recommendation that clubs go
all-seater.     Whilst many grounds have made significant
improvements, I am sure you will agree that there are some
grounds that have still not done enough to improve facilities and
amenities.

[The role of effective stewarding]


I note that the seminar programme devotes considerable time to
the role and training of stewards at football matches. I would
like to take this opportunity to make clear the Government's
support for the initiative which has been taken by the Football
League to produce a standard training package for stewards, which
clubs can adapt to their own particular needs. I understand that
the Football League were assisted in preparing the package by the
Association of Chief Police Officers. This type of co-operation
is most encouraging. We hope that, following this seminar, those
who manage Football Clubs will redouble their efforts to take
forward the initiative and recruit younger, fitter and more able
stewards.


                               11
After all, it is Football Clubs who benefit most from the
recruitment of effective stewards. Better stewarding will enable
a club to reduce it's dependence on the police which in turn
should lead to a reduced bill for policing matches.

Of course, there will still need to be a police presence at
matches to prevent disorder and ensure crowd safety. But it is
not in the interests of Ground Commanders to deploy police
officers to carry out tasks for which good calibre stewards have
proved effective. The police have pressing operational duties
elsewhere and can ill afford to use precious resources at
football grounds. It is therefore to the good of everyone that
this initiative should succeed.

[New offences as recommended by the Taylor Report]

As we all know, football is unfortunately the focus for a
minority of hooligans who see the game as an opportunity to
confront rival groups. The disorder which can occur jeopardises
the safety of other spectators.    Crowd safety and public disorder
are inextricably linked - the potentially troublesome situation
can quickly turn into a dangerous one.

It is for this reason that Lord Justice Taylor recommended that
four new specific offences should be created.      The Football
(Offences) Bill was introduced by Sir John Wheeler, Chairman of
the Home Affairs Select Committee.   The aims of the Bill were
supported by the Government, who assisted its passage with
strengthening amendments.  The Football (Offences) Act 1991,
which came into force at the start of the current Football
Season, created the offences of throwing missiles; indecent or
racialist chanting; and going on to the playing area; these three
are broadly as Taylor recommended.

The fourth offence, of selling tickets for and on the day of a
football match without the authority of the home club was ruled
to be beyond the scope of the Football (Offences) Bill. However,
the Government has an outstanding commitment to introduce the new
offence and will do so when Parliamentary time allows.


                                  12
[The progress already made to all seated stadia]

You will need no reminding that a principle recommendation of the
Taylor Report was that all Football League clubs should provide
all seated accommodation only, by 1994 or 1999, depending on
their League status.

The Football Licensing Authority has been established for some
while and each club will have now been visited by one of their
team of inspectors. The first licences are to be issued before
the start of the next season. However, I will not say any more
about the role of the FLA, as their Chief Executive is due to
address you this afternoon.

What I will say is that the Government supported Lord Justice
Taylor's recommendation on all-seated accommodation when he first
made it, and they continue to support it.      From August 1994
spectators at all First and Second Division grounds will be
admitted to seated accommodation only. Thereafter the all-seater
requirement will apply to all matches in Divisions 3 and 4 from
August 1999.

As you may have seen in the press last week there have been
renewed calls for the Government to review it's decision to apply
the all seated requirement to the smaller clubs.     There is no
intention currently to do so.

Taylor recommended that standing accommodation should be
eliminated at all grounds designated under the Safety of Sports
Grounds Act 1975 and all Football League grounds.      Following
consultation with the Association of Chief Police Officers and
other bodies the Government are satisfied that this requirement
will not be necessary, for Rugby League and Rugby Union grounds,
in addition all our major cricket grounds are predominantly all
seated.

Consequently, the Government has announced that they do not
intend to depart from a voluntary approach for these sports. The
new legislation that would be required to extend the all seater


                                13
f   requirement beyond football will not be introduced.    However the
    matter will be kept under review.


    [Progress of individual clubs]

    We know that many clubs have already increased the amount of
    seating provided at their ground in order to comply with the 1994
    deadline. I have watched recent matches on TV which were played
    at Goodison Park, Old Trafford and Villa Park, for example, and
    I can see that whole sections of some grounds are now seated
    which, less than two years ago, were still terraces.    This is an
    encouraging sign.

    Many of you have plans for major redevelopment work to commence
    at some time this year. I am sure that next season we will see
    even more grounds where new seats have been installed during the
    summer.

    However, the progress that is being made at many grounds
    throughout the country does not mean that the Government's
    requirement for grounds to convert to all seaters will be
    relaxed. The deadlines of 1994 and 1999 are there to be met and
    the FLA is in operation to ensure that they will be.

    [Possible effect of the Premier League on the all seated issue]


    Many of you here are from clubs who hope to be participating in
    the new FA Premier League which is due to start in August. The
    Government does not seek to involve itself in the way that
    football is run. However, we are concerned that the creation of
    the Premier League should not affect the implementation of the
    Taylor Report's all seater recommendation.

    Under the Football Spectators Act 1989     all matches involving
    Football League teams which are played at Football League grounds
    will need to be licenced by the Football Licensing Authority.
    This requirement will be extended to Premier League clubs before
    the start of next season, if necessary.



                                     14
m
Jr   The creation of the Premier League also bears on Government
     policy in that it may effect the distribution by the Football
     Trust of the money made available by the Government to assist
     clubs in carrying out ground improvement work. In his budget of
     1990 the Chancellor made available Â£100 million to the football
     industry over a five year period. This was in recognition of the
     expense of the work that needs to be carried out at many grounds.
     The Football Trust was selected by the Government to be the
     vehicle for channelling this grant aid to all Football League
     clubs and you will be hearing from its Secretary, Peter Lee,
     later.  For our part I will say only that we are alive to the
     question whether the Premier League clubs will continue to have
     access to the monies made available by the Government.


     We are also concerned that new money arising from the Football
     Association's initiatives, as outlined in their Blueprint, should
     not just benefit those clubs at the top of the game.

     [Europe]

     I want you to know that my Ministers, and we in the Department,
     applaud the initiative which led to the organisation of this
     seminar.  Spectator safety is important.   Just as we all want
     British football to lead the world as it did for many years, so
     the British supporter should have safe, modern stadia, fit for
     the 21st century. As Lord Justice Taylor identified, the trend
     towards seating is even stronger in Europe. UEFA are requiring
     that certain "high risk" matches are played in all seated grounds
     from the start of the 1993/94 season. This may require some of
     the clubs represented here to be all seated a year ahead of the
     1994 deadline.


     [Conclusion]

     Modern society is no longer prepared to put up with poor quality.
     People have voices and insist on being heard; the Government and
     politicians have to listen. On a local level, club managements
     must also take note. The disasters of recent years have scarred
     some lives for ever and blighted the game of football for too


                                    15
long. The one good thing to come out of them - at least as far
as spectators are concerned - is that there is a determination
to ensure that football stadia are safe and fit for the purpose
they are intended to serve.

Lord Wheatley said, in his report of 1972:

"Clubs which charge the public for admission have a duty to see
that their grounds are reasonably safe for spectators."


Reasonable safety - that's all we or anyone can expect. No one
can legislate away every danger, or inspect it away, or guarantee
absolute safety. But every paying spectator has the right to
enjoy conditions of reasonable safety.


[Close]

I would like to thank the Organisers for giving me this
opportunity to speak to so many representatives from the football
world.

Thank you for listening; I hope that you all have an enjoyable
and successful seminar.




                               16
