                               CONFIDENTIAL
                                                  2 MARSHAM STREET
                                                  LO N D O N , SWIP 3EB
 '5 SNVIRO^J                                      O t- 276 3 0 0 0

                                                  My ref:

                                                  Your r e f :




The Rt Hon John Wakeham MP
Lord President of the Council
Privy Council Office
Whitehall
London
SW1                                           0 July 1989




FOOTBALL SPECTATORSâ€™ BILL AND SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS


The Home Secretary and I have been considering what amendments to
the Football Spectators Bill should be tabled during the
Committee stage in the Commons, in order to put the Government in
the most favourable position to respond positively and speedily
to recommendations which Lord Justice Taylor might make on safety
as a result of his Inquiry into the Hillsborough disaster. I am
enclosing copies of an exchange of letters on the subject for the
benefit of colleagues who have not seen them (at Annex A).

Following 2nd      Reading on 27 June,    the House approved an
instruction to    the Committee on the Bill that it has powers to
make provision    in the Bill relating to any aspect of the safety
of spectators    at designated football matches. Thus the way is
clear to table   amendments on safety.

Other things being equal, there might have been advantage in
delaying the tabling of these amendments until Lord Justice
Taylor's interim report. But I understand that the interim report
may not reach the Home Secretary until late July; this would mean
delaying the amendments until the autumn spillover. Given the
shortage of time in the spillover, the handling of the Bill will
require us either to complete Standing Committee this month or to
build up enough time to justify a timetable motion. We have to
work on the basis that we will reach the Clauses to which the
amendments are to be made before Lord Justice Taylor's interim
report is received.



                           \
                             CONFIDENTIAL

Present safety legislation

Under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975, local authorities
have a responsibility for issuing safety certificates in respect
of designated sports grounds with accommodation for over 10,000
spectators. They exercise this responsibility in consultation
with the local police,      fire service and building control
officers. Local authorities are required to issue general safety
certificates in respect of grounds designated under the 1975 Act,
they cannot withhold one. The Home Office and the Scottish
Education Department have issued a Guide to Safety at Sports
Grounds, known as the "green guide". The guide is a voluntary
code. As a result of the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of
Sport Act 1987 the Home Secretary has power by Order to direct
local authorities on the contents of safety certificates for
specified classes of sports ground.

The Home Secretary therefore has powers which would enable him to
respond, if he so wished, to Taylor recommendations about, for
example, requiring local authorities to impose particular terms
and   conditions  in  safety   certificates.  But   the  existing
legislation does not contain powers to enable the Home Secretary
to monitor the way in which-an individual local authority carries
out its duty to issue and enforce a safety certificate and
require the authority to make any changes he thinks necessary. I
indicated during the 2nd Reading debate that we had it in mind to
table an enabling amendment on this involving the licensing
authority under the Bill, to help us to deal with safety matters
on receipt of Lord Justice Taylor's report.


Proposed amendments

I propose to table amendments covering the following two issues:-


      A. an amendment which provides an enabling power to give
      the licensing authority under the Bill the extra task of
      ensuring that local authorities are carrying out their
      responsibilities under the safety of sports grounds
      legislation in such a way as to achieve a consistent
      standard of safety at designated football matches; and a
      power, subject to appeal, to require a local authority to
      make changes to a certificate. The use of the enabling
      power would be subject to Pariiamentary approval, in the
      light of any relevant comments by Lord Justice Taylor;

      B. an amendment which would provide a power to require a
      move towards all-seated accommodation at major football
      grounds, to be exercised by statutory instrument, subject
      to Parliamentary approval, on the advice of the licensing
      authority.




                              2.
                           CONFIDENTIAL

Oversight of local authorities'   issue and enforcement of safety
certificates

Our proposal here is for an enabling provision, rather than one
directly giving the licensing authority under the Bill this extra
task, because we do not want to be seen to be pre-empting Taylor,
or to be open to the criticism that there is no conclusive
evidence that central monitoring of the performance of local
authorities in issuing and enforcing safety certificates is the
best way forward.

There are some (eg the Sports Council) who take the more radical
view that there should be a central licensing authority to issue
safety certificates for major sports clubs because of a perceived
variety in standards applied by local authorities. But these
differences may arise from the different nature of each football
ground, and a central authority might in time similarly be
accused of inconsistency. Moreover, the enquiry by Mr Justice
Popplewell into the Bradford City football club fire in 1985
concluded that the local authority safety certificate system was
working satisfactorily.

However, even if Lord Justice Taylor does not recommend central
monitoring of local authorities, I may wish to make use of the
proposed enabling power. Thus far in the passage of the Bill we
have argued that there is no reason why local authorities should
not work together with the licensing authority in dealing with
safety certificates    and  the requirements of     the national
membership scheme. But I think we must acknowledge that there
could be a potential conflict in this area. The Hillsborough
disaster, and the unsubstantiated assertions that the membership
scheme "would have made it worse", have increased the risk that a
small number of local authorities might seek to use their role as
"safety authorities" to disrupt the membership scheme.

The Home Secretary and I are agreed that the best way forward is
to take this enabling power. It would mean that, in addition to
its powers in respect of the national membership scheme set out
in the Bill, we would take a power to give the licensing
authority, if we felt it right to do so in the light of Taylor,
additional duties in respect of safety. These are described in
more detail at Annex B. We propose that the power in the Bill
should be exercisable by statutory instrument, subject to
negative resolution.


The status of the licensing authority

I propose that the licensing authority should be established as a
new NDPB. I am hesitant about creating a new public body but I
would not wish to contemplate giving powers of the kind proposed
to the Football Membership Authority responsible for the national
membership scheme given the leading role we envisage the football
authorities taking in the FMA.
                          CONFIDENTIAL

It would be possible to run the licensing authority as an
extension of a Government Department but that would make the
Secretary of State directly responsible for its functions. The
fact that its work would cut across two Government Departments is
also   an  argument  for   a NDPB,    though  its  own   line of
responsibility would have to be a clear one. The main attraction
of a new NDPB is that it would distance the Government from the
day-to-day running of the authority, and from detailed arguments
involving local authorities and perhaps local police and fire
services. We envisage that the members of the licensing authority
whom the Home Secretary and I would appoint should include
suitable people from the police and the fire service, as well as
the engineering and building professions.


Power to require all seater stadia

Following the Hillsborough disaster, the Home Secretary said that
the Government believed that the future of football in the
country lies in a national membership scheme in designated
grounds  and   "now it seems    also in providing all seated
accommodation    at  major   football   clubs",   involving   the
disappearance of terraces at these grounds.

I have discussed this issue with the football authorities and
made clear to them that it is not our intention that there should
be blanket change to all seated accommodation. The move to all
seating would be appropriate for the major Football League clubs;
which ones would be a matter for further discussion; and the
change would need to be phased in at the selected clubs. The cost
would be for football. It is clear that there is no consensus on
the merit of all seater stadia within football and there could be
opposition to the proposal from individual clubs.

The Home Secretary and I agree that the move to all seated
accommodation at major clubs could not successfully be left to
the discretion of individual local authorities, who in practice
would find it very difficult to impose such a requirement.
Instead this needs to be carried forward at national level. I
envisage that I should consult the licensing authority on which
grounds should be made subject to the change, to what extent (all
seated or some terracing allowed) and to what timetable. The
licensing authority would prepare advice in consultation with the
clubs and make a formal recommendation to me. The Bill would
provide for me to issue the appropriate direction in respect of
the grounds concerned.

This   directive  power   would  be   exercisable  by   statutory
instrument, subject to the negative resolution procedure and
Parliament would therefore be able to debate and vote on the
issue, in relation to the club or clubs concerned. The licensing
authority would act on the directive by making the all-seated
requirement a condition of the licence, and would be responsible
for enforcing this as well as other conditions of the licence.
                          CONFIDENTIAL

Timing

The start-up date of the licensing authority will, of course,
depend on our decision as to whether to proceed with extending
its powers in the way I am proposing, when we have seen Lord
Justice Taylor's report; and on Parliament's approval both of
extending the authority's powers and of the membership scheme
itself in the light of any comments that Taylor may make. We have
acknowledged that the earliest that the membership scheme can now
be implemented will be the early months of the 1990/91 season. On
the assumption that we decide to give the licensing authority
safety powers,   I would expect it to begin operation once
Parliament has given its approval in the light of the Taylor
report, ie early in 1990, to prepare for inspections in the
interval between the 1989/90 and 1990/91 seasons.


Financial and manpower implications of the licensing authority

As an NDPB the licensing authority would be subject to the usual
financial controls, including corporate planning, which apply to
such bodies. These controls would provide the mechanism for
monitoring performance and value for money and for policy
evaluation. The Football Spectators Bill provides for some or all
of the costs of the licensing authority in respect of its
functions under the national membership scheme to be recovered
through fees charged to football clubs for the issue of licenses.
I also propose that some or all of the costs of the licensing
authority in respect of its safety functions or of its role in
relation to all-seated accommodation should be recovered in this
way. I will consider further what proportion of the authority's
costs should be recovered by the licence fee, in consultation
with the Home Secretary and the Chief Secretary to the Treasury.
Receipts from fees by the authority would be treated as revenue
surrenderable to the Consolidated Fund and the authority's
expenses would be met by grant in aid for which I would need to
seek PES cover.

In my letter of 28 September 1988 seeking the Committee's
approval to Part I of the Bill, I estimated the cost to public
funds of the licensing authority as some Â£250,000 a year and
perhaps Â£500,000 in the first year. Given the extended powers we
now propose, I estimate the total annual cost of the licensing
authority and its inspectorate would be between Â£500,000 and
Â£750,000 a year. This includes salary and ancillary costs
including accommodation; travel and subsistence and a consultancy
budget. The inspectorate will be the equivalent of nine full time
staff members and the administrative support is likely to be five
strong. The first year in which the costs will arise in full will
be 1990/91 but there will be some preparatory costs in the
present financial year for which we do not have budgetary cover.
                             CONFIDENTIAL

EC implications

The functions of the licensing authority have no EC implications.


Summary

I propose that I should table amendments to the Bill in Standing
Committee:


          (i )    to give the licensing authority extra tasks
          relating to safety as set out in paragraphs 6A and Annex
          B;

          (ii)    to require all-seated accommodation at major clubs
          through the Bill's licensing system,      as proposed in
          paragraphs 6B and 13 to 16 above.


Given the pressure to make progress with Standing Committee, I am
afraid that I must ask for approval to table the amendments by
the end of this week. I am copying this to the Prime Minister,
other members of H Committee, David Waddington, Sir Robin Butler
and First Parliamentary Counsel.




                          NICHOLAS RIDLEY
                          (Approved by the Secretary of State and
                          Signed in his Absence)
                 CONFIDENTIAL                                          /}ywu?X       jr'\


                                         Q U E E N ANNE'S GATE L O ND O N SW1H 9AT




                                                  - Z l June 1989
                                                 CC?A^tWCfIHEfr.â€™1â€™IPÂ«U
                                                     re c e iv e d in
                                                       7 1 JUN1989

                  1 W \aJ U      a   ,            PRIVATE OFFICE

  FOOTBALL SPECTATORS BILL AND SAFETY AT FOOTBALL GROUNDS


  Thank you for your letter of 25 May in which you^considered
options available to achieve any amendments to legislation on
safety in the light of the outcome of the Taylor Inquiry.

    I can see the attraction of your option B (a national safety
authority for football grounds, taking over the local authority
role of issuing safety certificates). It is not at all clear of
course that the Taylor Inquiry'will recommend such a course. The
Popplewell Inquiry took the view that the local authority system
was working satisfactorily. The charge of inconsistency might
arise from the different nature of every ground, and could in
future be levelled against a national body.   I am sure you are
right that if we were to amend the Bill to this effect we would
be widely criticised for anticipating Taylor; just as important
is that Sir Peter Taylor himself might well take this view on
such a structural question.  I therefore agree with your
conclusion that we should not pursue this option.   If the Taylor
Inquiry were to recommend that the issue of safety certificates
should be a national rather than local responsibility, and we
thought his case for this was right, I agree that we should seek
an early place for the necessary legislation.

    This leaves your options A and C. These are only partial
alternatives, of course, as both would leave the basic structure
as it is. Under option C the national licensing authority under
the Bill (either yourself or an NDPB) would be given powers to
monitor the way local authorities exercise their duty to issue
safety certificates.   (They are required to issue certificates in
respect of designated grounds; they cannot withhold one.)

    I would not necessarily rule out option A as a way forward.
I recognise the potential for conflict between the licence and
the safety certificate, and the difficulty and opportunity for


                                                   /playing the



The Rt Hon Nicholas Ridley, MP
Department of the Environment




                     CONFiDENTIAL
                  CONFIDENTIAL
                             2   .


playing the national authority against the local authority.    It
should be possible however to produce an amendment to the Bill
which would build bridges between the two, as well as some form
of appeal, as you suggest.  I would use my powers in the safety
legislation to direct local authorities to implement any
acceptable Taylor recommendations about the content of the safety
certificate.  The requirement for all-seated accommodation could
be tackled on a national basis through the safety legislation by
means of inclusion in the Bill of a suitable amendment - I could
then designate a football ground as requiring not only a safety
certificate but also all-seated accommodation. Nevertheless, I
am ready to agree that it should be dealt with through the
licence, your option C, but it will of course be necessary here
also to build bridges between the licence and the certificate to
avoid conflict and allow for appeals where there is a conflict.
But option C does throw in sharp relief the need to avoid
conflict between the licence and the certificate.   I think we
should take an enabling power in the Bill to give the licensing
authority the powers you suggest, but this should be presented as
getting ourselves into the p -sition of being able to implement
Taylor if he made such a recommendation and we thought the case
for it was right.  Sir Peter Taylor himself might well feel that
his report was being unduly anticipated if we were to say that a
final decision had been taken to use the powers we were obtaining
whatever he reported.

    You may be right to say that imposition of a national
inspectorial role would be resisted by the local authorities
although the attraction of off loading responsibility to another
body may be hard for them to. resist.  I think there would be
strong misgivings by the Association of Chief Police Officers and
the Chief and Assistant Chief Fire Officers' Association at the
idea that the professional competence of the police and fire
services in making their input into the content of individual
safety certificates should be supervised by the licensing
authority and its inspectorate.   But there is a way of overcoming
this.  Both the authority and the inspectorate could be required
to include suitable people from the police and fire services.   I
think too that the engineering and building professions would
have to form part of any inspectorate.   Both make an essential
contribution to the content of safety certificates.

    I therefore agree that our officials should work up detailed
proposals, and I agree with you about the advantages of an
authority to which we both make appointments.

    I am copying this letter to the Prime Minister and the
Ministers present at her meeting of 9 May and to the Chief
Secretary and Sir Robin Butler.
                              CONFIDENTIAL
                                                    2 MARSH AM      STREET
                                                    LONDON      SW1P 3 E 3

                                                    01-276 30 00


                                                    My ref

                                                    Your ref




 The Rt Hon Douglas Hurd MP
 Home Office
 Queen A n n e 's Gate
 London
 SW1                                                         5 May 1989




  FOOTBALL SPECTATORS BILL AND SAFETY AT FOOTBALL GROUNDS


i The letter from my private secretary to the Prime Minister's of
  17 May said that I would discuss with you the relative merits of
  using the licensing provisions of the Football Spectators Bill or
  the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 to achieve any amendments
  to legislation on safety which Lord Justice Taylor may recommend.
  Having now given further thought' to this subject, I think that we
  have to look at these possibilities in the context of the
  relationship between the licensing authority which the Bill
  presently proposes and local       authorities who   issue safety
  certificates under the Act.

7w In organisational terms, I think that we have three options:


         A. maintain the existing role of local authorities as
         "safety authorities" under the Safety of Sports Grounds
         Act and run alongside them a separate licensing authority
         under the Football Spectators Bill, with a procedure for
         resolving disputes between them;

         B. take away local authorities' safety role in relation to
         designated football grounds and give it to a new national
         safety authority,    for which we would provide in the
         Football   Spectators   Bill  and  which  would   also  be
         responsible for the licensing functions already in the
         Bill;
      C. give the Bill's licensing authority the additional task
      of ensuring that local authorities' were carrying out
      their responsibilities under the Safety of Sports Grounds
      Act in such a way as to achieve a consistent standard of
      safety at designated football grounds.


The House authorities have taken such a generous view of the
possibility for extending the Football Spectators Bill to cover
safety matters that it may be that, in legal terms, any of these
options could be achieved by using the Bill. Whether they are
politically achievable, or desirable,    is of course, another
matter.


A. Keep the licensing and safety authorities separate

This is the line that we have taken in the passage of the Bill so
far. We have argued that there was no reason why different
authorities should not work together in dealing with football
grounds as other licensing authorities do when working in similar
areas. I am afraid that the Hillsborough disaster, and the
unsubstantiated assertions that the national membership scheme
"would have made it worse", have increased the risk that a small
number of local authorities might seek to use their role as
"safety authorities" t o .disrupt the national membership scheme,
for example by refusing safety certificates to football grounds-
on the basis that the national membership scheme was "unsafe".
Sheffield and Lewisham have already made noises about this.

We have, of course, always said that we would not introduce the
national membership scheme until we were satisfied that it was
workable,  and safe and we would not expect a mischievous
intervention by a local authority of this kind to stand up to
judicial review. We could also take steps to avoid confrontation
between the Bill's licensing authority and local authorities by
inserting in the Bill some form of appeal in the event of a
disagreement - to the court or perhaps to me, if I do not take on
the licensing function. This would not of course eliminate the
potential for conflict.

If we were to pursue this option, and Lord Justice Taylor were to
make acceptable recommendations specifically about the contents
of safety certificates, you would presumably wish to use the
powers which I understand that y o u â€™have as a result of the Fire
Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987, to direct local
authorities to act upon the recommendations. As far as a move
towards all-seater stadia is concerned, I would prefer to use the
licensing authority established by the Football Spectators Bill,
because I think that this is an issue which is best tackled on a
national basis.

I recognise that the more that we extend the powers of the Bill's
licensing authority, the greater the potential for confusion and
conflict between it and local "safety authorities". In view of
these potential problems I have concluded that we should not
pursue this option.
j   B. A national safety authority for football grounds

    If we were starting from scratch now, rather than with a Bill
    that has already almost completed its passage through the Lords,
    this is the option that I would propose to you - a single
    national authority to deal with both the licensing of designated
    football grounds for the national membership scheme and with
    safety matters at those same grounds. I am aware that the
    Popplewell report was broadly supportive of the working of the
    Safety of Sports Grounds Act. But I understand that there has
    been criticism of it since then,       from inside and outside
    football,  on the grounds that it is inconsistently applied
    between local authorities. The Hillsborough disaster itself is
    obviously further cause for anxiety. And the more that we
    consider what needs to be done to deal with both hooliganism and
    safety at football grounds, the more that I think that they
    should be .looked at together from a national perspective. A
    national authority could, of course, carry forward whatever
    safety measures Taylor recommended.

    I recognise, however, that it may be politically difficult to
    adapt the Football Spectators Bill to make such a radical
    amendment to the Safety of Sports Grounds Act in the Bill, in
    advance of Lord Justice Taylor's final report. If we attempted to
    do so, we would find it difficult to resist the criticism that we
    were anticipating Taylor -in a major respect. If Taylor does in
    fact recommend a national safety authority in place of local
    authorities,  I would hope that we could take the necessary
    legislation through very quickly. In the meantime, I think that
    the most we can do is my third option.


    C. Give the Bill's licensing   authority   power   to monitor   local
    "safety authorities"

    Subject to your views, I have it in mind that we might add to the
    functions of the licensing authority for which the Bill currently
    provides, two additional functions in respect of safety: (i) a
    duty to ensure that safety certificates are being applied in such
    a way as to achieve a consistent standard of safety at football
    grounds designated under the Football Spectators Bill; and (ii) a
    power to require that additional safety measures which the
    authority considers necessary are taken.

    The licensing authority would need to employ an inspectorate to
    monitor clubs' compliance with the national membership scheme,
    the   operation  of   the  safety certificate     and any     other
    requirements which the authority had imposed.     The authorityâ€™s
    powers would have to be drawn wide      enough to enable us to ensure
    that local authorities could not use their safety certificates to
    disrupt the national membership scheme and that decisions taken
    by the national licensing authority would take precedence. The
    licensing authority would monitor local authorities' performance
    in granting   and operating safety certificates   and enforce any
    directions which you might make about the contents of safety
    certificates in the light of Taylor. The second power should
enable the licensing authority, inter alia, to require selected
clubs to move towards all-seater stadia, which I understand may
not be within the scope of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act.

This would no doubt be resisted by the local authority lobby. It
would be said that we were interfering with local authorities'
safety role, in advance of the Taylor report, to protect the
national membership scheme. But I think that we could resist such
criticism on the grounds that a nationally consistent approach to
safety, as well as to counter-hooliganism measures, at football
grounds is desirable whatever Lord Justice Taylor recommends and
that we are leaving the primary responsibility for safety
certificates with local authorities. I do not think that it would
be appropriate to make the establishment of the authority with
these functions contingent on Lord Justice Taylor's final report
but it would, along with the rest of the Bill, be the subject of
commencement order provisions (though not in this case, to
Parliamentary procedure).

 If you agree that this is the right approach to pursue, I suggest
 that our officials should work up a detailed proposal for
 collective Ministerial approval and explore possible amendments
 to the Bill with Parliamentary Counsel. I think that a licensing
 authority of the kind that I . am proposing would be more
 appropriately housed in an NDPB, to which you and I would both
 make appointments, than in a Government Department, though I
 share the Prime Minister's hesitation about creating another new
 public body. We would of course consult the Treasury about this
 proposal.

 I would not wish to contemplate giving powers of this kind to the
 Football Membership Authority which will        run the national
 membership scheme itself, unless we also had to take over the
 running of the Football Membership Authority. For the moment, I
 continue to hope that we can leave the Football Membership
 Authority to the football authorities though I shall wish to take
 a close interest in its composition and constitution and it may
 be desirable to appoint some of the same people to the licensing
 authority and the Football Membership Authority. We may need to
 amend the Bill to ensure that this is possible.


 Conclusion

   Are you content for us to work towards option (C) as
â– â– -pax^agT-aph 12 ^ above? I am copying this letter to the Prime
   Minister and the Ministers present at her meeting of 9 May and to
   the Chief Secretary to the Treasury and to Sir Robin Butler.




                                 NICHOLAS RIDLEY
                                              CONFIDENTIAL




                                                                                Annex B



The licensing authority


1.   We     propose         to     give   the     authority         powers       to    enable      it     to
monitor      the way          in which          local      authorities          issue       and   enforce
safety certificates. The object would be to ensure a consistency
of   approach          as    between       one    authority          and   another           in   setting
standards for safety,                   and that local authorities have effective
systems      in    place         to     satisfy       themselves      that       ground       operators
fully       comply          with        the     terms        and     conditions              of    safety
certificates.               The         licensing           authority           after         necessary
consultation           would       have       power    to    require       an    individual            local
authority         to        make       changes        to     a     certificate          and       to     its
arrangements for ensuring compliance with the certificate.


2. It is important that a local authority opposed in principle to
the football membership scheme envisaged by the Bill should not
be   able    to use          its       safety certificate power                 to     frustrate the
membership        scheme.          Equally      it is       important       that       the    licensing
authority         should         not    approve       arrangements         for        the    membership
scheme      which      are       not    compatible          with    safety.      Guidance         on    the
relationship between the authorities could be provided by Home
Office and DOE, perhaps in the form of a joint circular.


3. There is nevertheless a risk that there will on occasion be a
genuine difference of opinion between a local authority and the
licensing authority about how to apply the Guide at a particular
sports ground.              Under the power proposed,                 the final decision on
any changes to the terms and conditions of a safety certificate
desired by the licensing authority will rest with that authority.
But since the local authority will still have the statutory duty
to issue and enforce safety certificates, we would make provision
                                           CONFIDENTIAL

in the Bill for the local authority to be able to appeal against
the decrippon             of   the    licensing     authority          to    the     magistrates'
court.



Structure


4.    In order to carry out its functions the licensing authority
would    need        to    have      an    inspectorate.        The    Home        Secretary   has
pointed        out    that      there       would   be     strong       misgivings        by   the
Association of Chief Police Officers and the Chief and Assistant
Chief     Fire        Officers'           Association      at         the     idea      that   the
professional competence of the police and fire services in making
their input into the content of individual                              safety certificates
should be supervised by the licensing authority.                                   To secure the
confidence       of       interested        parties   both       the        authority    and   its
inspectorate will therefore need to include suitable people from
the police and fire services. We also think that the engineering
and   building        professions          would    have   to    be     represented       on   the
authority and the inspectorate teams since both make an essential
contribution to the content of safety certificates.


5. We therefore propose that a small licensing authority should
be set up on which                the     interests      I have       identified        should be
represented under a lay chairman.                     Appointments would be at the
level     of     retired        Chief       Constable      and        his     equivalent.      The
inspectorate would comprise of teams of inspectors,                                  and I think
we would require three teams or their part time equivalent,                                    on
which the same interests would be represented.                                Appointments      to
the inspectorate would be at Chief Superintendent level.


6. The team of inspectors could be expected to spend some 4 days
on a ground inspection,                   including preliminary work on plans and
the safety certificates,                  reappraisal and report in the light of
the on site inspection and travelling. We envisage that grounds
should be inspected annually but that the authority would have
discretion about the nature and extent of each inspection. It may
decide that a full inspection is only required at less frequent
                                  CONFIDENTIAL

intervals   say   every     two   or    three     years   and   in   the   light    of
physic-ajs.. changes   to     the       ground.     The    authority       and     its
inspect^Pte would      require         a small,    say    5 man,     administrative
support team.
