PRIME MINISTER


                       SOCCER HOOLIGANISM




Colin Moynihan telephoned me today to say that he is to address
the Magistrates' Conference in Manchester on Friday. He intends
to set out the current position on football hooliganism, what the
Government is doing etc.

In it he has it in mind, unless you have any objections, to call
upon the FA to cancel a friendly international it has arranged
with Holland in December.

You will recall that after the European Championships you asked
the FA to consider whether to go ahead with European friendly
matches and they cancelled a fixture with Italy at Wembley.

However, they have inconceivably gone ahead with the Dutch fixture
in the middle of December notwithstanding that Holland has
probably the worst soccer hooligan problem in Europe after
ourselves.

The view at D/Environment is that it would be foolhardy to go
ahead with this fixture, but that it would be better to ask the FA
to cancel it after tomorrow's World Cup match with Sweden rather
than as a knee jerk reaction to the disgraceful hooliganism on the
ferry to Gothenberg yesterday.

I assume you would not wish to question Mr Moynihan's judgment.
The FA do seem to be behaving extraordinarily stupidly in
organising a friendly with Holland at a time when, apart from
anything else, they should, in their own interests, be cultivating
their return to European football proper.

If however you agree, you may wish to   leave it to Mr Moynihan to
make the announcement on Friday. The    most you might say to the
Daily Express this afternoon, if they   raise the Dutch game (which
is unlikely), is that you hope the FA   are looking closely at
future friendly fixtures.




                                        BERNARD INGHAM
                                        September 5, 1989
