                                  RESTRICTED




                           CABINET OFFICE
               70 Whitehall London SW1A 2AS Telephone 01-279 OjÂ£f}




K032



Dr P I Freeman
Controller and Chief Executive
Her Majesty's Stationery Office
St Crispins
Duke Street
Norwich
                                                           26 January 1990




We spoke following the Cabinet meeting yesterday at which the
Prime Minister raised again the question of the time taken to
print the final report of Lord Justice Taylor's inquiry into the
Hillsborough Stadium disaster, and the possibility of a fast
track arrangement which would enable the printing of such reports
within 24-48 hours of their receipt.      The Lord President has
asked me to make enquiries into the matter, and I should be
grateful for your help.

2.   You will obviously want to make enquiries into the
particular problems affecting the Taylor report.   The report was
not available to Ministers until Monday of this week and I
understand that final corrected proofs were not available to HMSO
until the middle of the week.        The report is obviously a
substantial document but I suspect that part of the reason why it
took the time it did to print was the wish to include photographs
in it.   It was also, of course, desired to distribute the report
so that it could be available at HMSO centres nationally on the
day of publication.   There may, however, have been other factors
involved, and I should be grateful for your account of them.

3.   I suggest that our main focus, however, should not be on
what happened over Taylor but on what difficulties there might be
in providing an arrangement which would meet Ministers' wish to
have printed versions of such reports available within 24 or 48
hours of their receipt.    You have, of course, some fast track

                                   RESTRICTED
                           RESTRICTED



arrangements already.  What are these, and would they need to be
augmented?    What would the costs be?       What would be the
complications if, for example, photographs, maps or colour
printing were required? As I explained, Ministers wish to have a
system which will cut to the minimum the time between receipt and
publication of a report, in order to minimise the time in which
the contents of that report may leak in a partial way and in
which Ministers cannot make a full statement about the report
because the printed text is not available. Ministers are not, on
this occasion, principally worried about security, though I
recognise that that may be a factor which could affect any fast
track arrangement in certain cases.

4.   It would be helpful if you could let me have a response on
this within the next two weeks.     You may wish to clear your
response through the Economic Secretary, as I am sure that the
Lord President will wish to report the outcome of his enquiries
to the Prime Minister.

5.   I am copying this letter to the Private Secretary to the
Economic Secretary and to John Gilbert in the Home Office.




                           P J C MAWER




                           RESTRICTED
