                  RE: HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER


The Report of Lord Justice Taylor has now been published and
in his findings he criticises a number of officers of the
South Yorkshire Police.

Lord Justice Taylor was assisted throughout by the Chief
Constable of West Midlands Police, Mr Geoffrey Dear, whose
officers made the necessary preliminary enquiries and took
statements from a very large number of witnesses.

The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire, Mr Peter Wright, has
now written to the Director drawing his attention to the
criticism of his officers in the context of general criticism
and allegation that the evidence revealed the possibility of
offences of manslaughter by certain police officers and
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club and he requests that this
aspect of the matter be considered.

He has also written to Mr Dear (letter attached) saying that
if it is decided that a criminal investigation should be
undertaken he presumes it would be carried out by Mr Dear's
team.

Mr Dear, accompanied by A.C.C. Mervyn Jones, has attended at
the office to discuss the matter and it was agreed that a
criminal investigation was warranted and that this should be
undertaken by West Midlands Police subject to formal
appointment by Mr Wright with the approval of the P.C.A. in
accordance with the provision of the Police and Criminal
Evidence Act.
