                                         24 April 1989




FA/HILLSBOROUGH

Panorama had been in touch with Wembley who had been in
touch with the FA concerning the possibility of cameras and
a documentary team going behind the scenes at Wembley at '3SU.
some of the forthcoming matches to produce material for a
documentary that they plan to screen entitled "The Future of
Football". Wembley were not keen to have them behind the
scenes yet and Glen's reaction was that they ought not to be
allowed back.

I entirely endorsed this and said that at this stage prior
to the Taylor Inquiry having taken evidence and reported),it
would be inappropriate for TV cameras and documentary
producers to make mileage out of comparing the arrangements
at Wembley with Sheffield.  I did not think the Panorama
programme would be pointed at anything other than failings
and would inevitably fuel press comment and be generally
unwelcome at this stage. They thanked me for that.

Engaged 10 minutes including dictation


I telephoned          1 I had received her fax enclosing
the Special Executive Committee's minutes of 18 April.  I
noted who they would be circulated to and said that the list
of the minutes was fine for circulation.

I mentioned my conversation with G]$n Kirton to her. She
thought the reason might be that people who would normally
be performing their duties would be taken away on those
duties by the Panorama team.  I said perhaps rather than
giving a blanket refusal to the Panorama team we could
explain that the Inquiry may be prejudiced by any points
raised in the documentary and that Panorama may like to make
a programme after Justice Taylor's I n q u i r y ^

Engaged 15 minutes including dictation
