                                         21 April 1989




FA/HILLSBOROUGH

I spoke to Lord Justice Taylor's clerk on
explained we were acting for the Football Association in
connection with the Hillsborough Inquiry and I wondered
whether Lord Justice Taylor had managed to formulate any
time scale in which he anticipated holding the Inquiry.
Were there are any other administrative details I ought to
be aware of such as venue, whether the Inquiry was going to
include coroners' inquiries and police inquiries etc. He
said that Lord Justice Taylor was still getting into the
matter and would be making a decision early next week. He
suggested I give him a ring next Thursday and noted our
involvement.

Engaged 10 minutes including dictation


          telephoned. She had been speaking tp Graham Kelly
about arrangements for the cup final should         be
replayed. Kelly wanted to make some changes to previous
years procedures. We had mentioned at our meeting that a
fine line had to be drawn between action that could be
interpreted by the Inquiry or by the press for comment as
corrective ,ato*a^acknowledging mistakes had been made) and
prudent in view of the fact that a tragedy had occurred.

Kelly was keen to put safety as the paramount factor and we
agreed that should be right with any spin-off implications
that may be drawn by the press and the Inquiry as being
unfortunate.  For instance, one of the things that was going
to be done was that two sections of the grounds for next
Wednesday's Wembley International were going to be left
empty as a mark of respect for the Hillsborough dead.

We agreed that it was a difficult line to go down but of
course one must take into account safety as a paramount
feature.      would stress to Graham that we were anxious
not to give the impression of reacting to the tragedy by
revamping all the methods of organisation.

Engaged 10 minutes including dictation
