                                                   17 Mav 1989




F A /HILLSBORQUGH

Masting at FA Headquarters Lancaster Gata,

Present 5         ff>«                     ’reshf ields

                    ■Setifi-'Dyson'- Q®f

                  ©teaham Kellyr Chief Executive)
                 WW&it' iviirtorF                ) FA


1,    JDv brought everyone up-to-date on his conversation with
ll&rew' Collins OC. The FA would have an opportunity to
comment in writing on the written submissions put in by
other parties, The judge may be disinclined to hear oral
evidence but we would wait and see and make an application
if necessaryf if there were issues which were susceptible to
questioning inquisitorially I It was bad idea tactically to
write a letter at this stage voicing concern.

2„   We discussed the constitution of the Executive
Committee,   It would be appointed on 24 May at the Council
aeeting.   A committee of 5 was in mind. They would have
delegated power and should be aware that the FA would be
going public on fundamental points of policy.

3,   We were given further papers during the course of the
meeting.

4,   With regard to the preparatory work it was agreed that
working papers would be produced for the committee to read
and then contribute to the discussion,

5 , We      required further statistical        data.
                                           We handed over
‘J G v T ' ? file to John-Dvson which he had compiled
                                              from the
template set. There were no 1989 statistics as they were
kept   on a log, We would get copies,

5,     We were informed that there was an annual meeting with
the Metropolitan police to discxiss problems but these were
■jonfined to London clubs, “              went on to that
committee and we should get copies of the minutes,
 7,   With regard to disciplinary hearings we would get some
 further papers explaining what action the FA has taken
 against recalcitrant clubs.

 3,   The FA would not get involved in the detail of safety
 at grounds but if they listed deadlines for instance in
 submitting their safety certificate there was provision in
 the handbook to deal with it.

9.   We would need to analyse the disciplinary hearings over
the course of about 10 years, There would be about 5 a year
on crowd misconduct. Most of the cases, is 500 to 1000 a
year would be on players who transgressed.

1£L-— We..would then draw up a schedule. We were informed by
___________ the Records Clerk that major cases ware kept but
small ones were thrown out. We would need all those files.

11. With regard to ACPO statistics,quarterly arrest
statistics were sent to the FA and we would need them.
There were also British Transport Police weekly reports
which stopped half way through the season and perhaps we
could also look at those.

12. We could add valuable information to the Inquiry on
perimeter fencing and all seater stadia drawing on the FA's
foreign experience. There was an incident recently on a
cerry where West Ham and Manchester United fans caused
problems. We would need to know what was done about it and
look at the report.      • .    ■ was going to France to look
at the technology the French had adopted with their
perimiter fences,   If possible that should be brought
forward.

.13. We also received papers on expulsion orders that
Magistrates Courts had imposed on certain defenders.

14. We went back through some papers to one of thefirst
memoranda on crowd control from theFA since 1948. This was
In 1970. We were also given copies      of t£te handbook
containing appendices referring to crowd behaviour.

15. We discussed the ID scheme. The FA'3 line was that it
was opposed to it. There was a joint Working Committee with
the Football League,  It may be appropriate for the FA to
taka a line on it and make a decision. We did not want to
be snagged by Football League members on the committee,

15.  Briefly the FA were opposed tothe ID scheme because ID
cards would not solve hooliganism problems. The violence
occurred away from stadia.  It was not a football problem
but a social problem.  It would also be difficult to process
people through turnstiles if they had to produce their
cards.  It was impractical with regard to safety,  Also the
 cost was prohibitive, The industry would suffer because of
 the cost of installation and the loss of market,       It was not
 appropriate for 6000 arrests par year to penalise 20 million
 innocent fans who regularly attended football matches,
 There was an ■K»ifetesEsaii^a®freport on the financial aspect of
 the matter and the Luton experience showed that gates would
 fall. We would be sent copies of the relevant papers,

17, Apparently Bert Millichip had been asking what powers
the FA had if the League prevented them doing anything, The
FA sanctioned the league and it was thought that the FA
could go its own way.

13.  With regard to all seater stadia for major clubs_j
revenue was discussed to pay for the improved facility,  A
paper was prepared for the 1990 World Cup which we obtained
a copy of. The effect on hooliganism was a good one as
observed from the Aberdeen and Rangers experience. FIFA
regulations required at least 12 all seater stadia before a
World Cup could be held with over 30,000 in each.

19. With regard to perimeter fencing UEFA regulations would
play a part. The design was a matter between the local
authority and the club. We discussed the green guide to
safety at football stadia.   The FA did not have a lot of
iaput, It paid for some cr&sh barriers at grounds in 1972,
It recommended perimeter fences at grounds where there was a
1livelihood of encroachment,  They would guage that from the
history.

20. We would get the detailed information from the
Popplewell Inquiry and also the green guide.

21.   With regard to medical provision                   tfeaf
                          may have some material but the FA
were not expert enough to express a view, However, there
was a gaping hole in the green guide as it was on medical
provision and it may be worth the FA setting down
recommendations in relation to that. There was a medical
committee at the FA but there was no real in-house
expertise. We could however point to the deficiencies in
c.he present recommendations,

22.  With regard to crowd control generally!
nay be co-opted on to the committee on the basis that he had
"ast experience of hooliganism and also attended committees
on anti-hooliganism.

23 , With regard to the peculiar problems of semi-finals r<y*e
discussed whether or not the semi-finals could be held at
Wembley or on green field sites to be built.     We discussed
the views of ^fSai^ayiocfiff and his council for the FSA on
this matter,
24, With regard to new stadia it may be possible to do a
feasibility study but government support would be necessary.
The government levy a tax of 42^% from the pools promoters
which was paid at source. That money might ba used for
improvements if the government were persuaded to pay the
money straight over to the football grounds improvement
trust. The Football Trust gave 54% of its income to the
football grounds improvement trust. It derives its revenue
principally from Pools promoters and Spot the Ball
competitions.  It is a quasi-football levy board whose main
objectives are to attack hooliganism and do anything for the
benefit of the game. Grants would go from the football
grounds improvement trust to clubs across the board both
rich and poor with regard to complying with the safety acts
and improve facilites at grounds generally,

25. If the local licensing authority asked the club to
implement any measures there ought to be money from the
improvement trust for that. They spend what they get which
is about £10 million a year. We discussed whether the
government may be persuaded to take less taxes and have the
money paid over for improvement of stadia.

25. We discussed late arrival and pre-match entertainment.
We also discussed the problems associated with drunken fans
andnon-ticket holders and touts.

27,   We also discussed the inadequacy of turnstiles and
signposting.

28,  We briefly touched on deferring kick-off and
segregation generally.

29,  With regard to ticket allocation we were told that at
the -Sherpa Van Final this year between Burnley and Wolves
which was a play-off of third and fourth division champions
tha amount of tickets that the clubs got were directly
proportional to their home and away gates,

30,    Wealso mentioned that CCTV inside and outside major
grounds ought to be looked at,

31,               agreed to provide an initial paper which
would provide background material, statistics,
recommendations and the FA/s view on:-

(1)   ID Scheme.
(ii)       crowd control,
{iii)      perimeter fencing
(iv)       all-seatsr stadia
(7 )       medical provision
(wi)       semi"final problems
(vii)      facilities and revenues
(viii)    'whether communication with clubs could be improved
          through the FSA

■There   some debate as to whether tactically we should deal
with that or respond to the FSA putting it forward, It was
agreed that we might want to deal with that in our paper,

We would go away and read the papers and help              out
the structure he produced,                mentioned that it
might be worth getting hold of the way in which Marks §
Spencer and Tescofe handle their consumer relations on tha
issue of dealing with the public and the FSA.

/Kelly,1mentioned a meeting he was going to with
kidleyvColin Moynihan and the Chairman. We suggested it
might fee an idea that he got an impression of what the
meeting was going to discuss before ha went,

Engaged 4 hours including travelling waiting and dictation
