                                         25 April 1989




FA/HILLSBOROUGH

I spoke to Mr Brummel at the Treasury Solicitor’s office.
He said we may have seen in a draft press release which was
going out to all the major newspapers that the preliminary
hearing was to take place at Sheffield Town Hall at 11 am on
Friday. There would be applications for representation and
the judge would be giving directions. He had met with the
judge earlier on today and he said that he would be giving a
date for the start of the hearing.

Quite a lot of the hearing would be taken up by footage of
the various TV cameras which took film of the relevant
events. He hoped that would save time.

Andrew Collins QC had decided to keep a tight control over
what evidence could be presented. He would be liaising with
us more closely in due course.

With regard to witness statements, the West Midlands police
were committing a large amount of manpower to the Inquiry
and they would be processing those statements soon.

The judge had expressed the view that it should be a quick
but thorough fact finding inquiry and should not be about
allocating blame.

It would take the form of oral hearings and would be looking
specifically at immediate background to the events including
such matters as traffic, police control, crown behaviour and
ticket allocation.
                      <8.   «

He said we should get in touch with Mr Whalley at the Home
Office who was the secretary to the inquiry to tell him
about representation.

We agreed to speak soon.

Engaged 15 minutes including dictation
