                MEETING RE:    POSSIBLE FA CUP SEMI-FINAL TIE
                              HELD AT OLD TRAFFORD
                          ON THURSDAY 20TH APRIL 1989


Present:   Greater Manchester Police     Asst Chief Constable D Phillips
                                         Chief Supt A Roberts (Ground
                                         Commander)
                                                         (Liaison Officer)

           Borough of Trafford


           Fire Service                  Division Officer Hilton
                                         Division Officer Hall

           Manchester United FC          Mr K R Merrett (Secretary)
                                            â€œ          lAssistant Secretary)
                                                        Box Office Manager)
                                                        (Architect)

           The Football Association      Mr A R Titcombe


Mr Merrett opened the meeting by inviting the bodies present to repeat in
brief their opinion of the overall situation relating to ground safety
and crowd control at Old Trafford as expressed in the meeting held two
days previous.

The Borough of Trafford did not intend to anticipate the findings of the
public enquiry and were satisfied with the Stadium from a structural
point of view.

The Police were also not recommending any alteration in procedures until
after the Hillsborough enquiry. Mr Phillips indicated that a meeting of
the ACPO Sub-Committee would be held as soon as possible and they may
adopt an interim position, probably on the lines of gates in safety
fences being unlocked and manned while spectators were in grounds. These
gates should also be fitted with universal locks.

Mr Merrett informed the meeting that the Old Trafford gates were, indeed,
unlocked and manned and checked prior to every match to ensure easy
opening.

The Fire Service explained that although some egress from the stands was
through the safety fence they were satisfied with the present
arrangement and their emphasis was on limiting the spread of fire. Old
Trafford had trained fire stewards supervised by a former member of the
Fire Service.

Mr Titcombe explained that if he emphasised any particular concerns
regarding the arrangements for a possible Semi-Final it should not be
inferred that either he or The Football Association were apportioning
blame for the Hillsborough tragedy.  Having heard of the general
satisfaction with the arrangements at Old Trafford for matches in
general, he asked whether anyone had any objections to the Semi-Final
between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest in particular being staged at Old
Trafford on Sunday 7th May. No objection was raised.
                                  -   2   -




Safety Fences

It was agreed that for this match, the gates in the safety fences would
not only be unlocked and manned as was customary but also open as a form
of reassurance.

Kick-off Time

The Police indicated that they would favour a early kick-off and
Manchester United, while not disagreeing, were concerned that information
should be disseminated in Nottingham and Liverpool regarding journey
times to prevent spectators arriving unnecessarily early. The Police
were concerned about the possible influence of alcohol even at such an
occasion and suggested a 1.00 pm kick-off which was agreed by all
parties. However, Mr Titcombe asked what explanation should be given for
such a time knowing that linking any sort of concern about drunkenness
with a match such as this could give the tabloids a field day. The
Police agreed that, if questioned, the explanation "on Police advice"
could be used.

Travel

Mr Merrett asked whether it was known if there would be any likely
hold-ups on the roads and Chief Superintendent Roberts replied that he
had already made enquiries and no major roadworks were planned and this
would be double checked closer to the day. Two entirely separate routes
had been devised for the two sets of supporters and their journeys will
be monitored from the various points of departures. He did not
anticipate any problems but if a delay in kick-off was required then so
be it.

There was a discussion on the support likely for the game and it was
agreed that it was possible that from the Liverpool side in particular
either very few would travel or at the other extreme a huge number would
turn out as a mark of respect.   It was agreed that the possibility of a
video transmission at Anfield should be investigated. Whatever their
mood, the Police could not allow a large gathering of people on the
concourse outside the ground.

Media

It was agreed that there would be an enormous amount of media interest
and that, whilst inside the ground it could be controlled in the normal
way for a football match, outside in particular there were likely to be
many television crews etc from all over the world.  It would be necessary
for The Football Association to control and co-ordinate this and the
Press Office would contact MUFC on the subject. Almost certainly an
overspill press box would be required.

Ground Capacity

Mr Titcombe pointed out that Nottingham Forest had close to 28,000
tickets for the match at Hillsborough. The Football Association were
determined that for the Old Trafford game both clubs would have the same
allocation. This would clearly mean that some people in Nottingham would
be unable to attend the match if all 28,000 wanted to do so. The club
had already been approached on the subject and accepted the situation.
                                    -   3   -




The Police recommended a maximum capacity of 52,000 and both Mr Titcombe
and            |were a little surprised that they felt able to accommodate
so many. However, the Police felt that to have considerably less on the
terracing would cause problems of its own. Mr Merrett indicated that a
reduction of 15% on the terracing would mean a capacity of 51,000 and it
was agreed that this would be the maximum. The Football Association
would not be selling tickets as normal to people within the game but
would be restricting its requirements to complimentary tickets for'as few
as possible bearing in mind that it may be appropriate to invite certain
organisations to be represented at the match.

Alcohol

It was agreed that the match would be entirely "dry*1 with no alcohol
obtainable anywhere in the ground.

Stewards

MUFC would ask their stewards to report at 10.00 am for possible opening
of the gates between 10.30 and 11.00 am. The two competing clubs would
also be invited to provide stewards. There would be an overt Police
presence, more to guarantee safety than to prevent disorder.

Medical

There would be an increased St Johns presence with the possibility of a
caravan positioned outside the ground. There would also be counselling
facilities available for people who came to the match but found they
could not cope with the emotional strain. There would probably be media
enquiries on the medical provisions for the game and consideration could
be given to a press statement taking the initiative on this point.

Marks of Respect

It was agreed that there would be a need to carefully programme the
pre-match events to allow the various parties the opportunity to pay
their respects, particularly the Liverpool club and Supporters'
Association.  However, it would be necessary after that to prevent, as
sympathetically as possible, unofficial demonstrations. At the time, a
band with a carefully selected programme was the only "entertainment"
being considered.  It was agreed that progress on this front could only
be made with Liverpool's input.     4

Programme

MUFC would liaise with the Press Office to consider any special messages
that needed to be included.

Final Confirmation of the Fixture

Mr Titcombe said that despite the various press speculation, Liverpool
had given no indication as to whether or not they would take any further
part in the Competition.  However, it was recognised that a firm decision
was required and that if on Tuesday 25th April the club had not confirmed
its participation or withdrawal, then The Football Association would need
to make a ruling.  If this was not the case then there would not be
sufficient time to make proper arrangements for the match on the 7th May.
                                  -   4   -




Ticketing

Since the two clubs had now been allocated different parts of the ground
new tickets would be printed and arrangements would be discussed
subsequently.

The meeting closed and Mr Titcombe thanked everyone for their
participation.
