                                        1 November 1989




FA/HILLSBOROUGH
Attending at a meeting at the FA's offices of a joint
liaison committee of the Football League and Football
Association with
Present:       Graham Kelly        FA
               Adrian Titcombe
               Glen Kirton
                Noel White         Football League
               Geoff Thomson
               Barry Bright
Ian Stott chaired the meeting. (Oldham Athletic Football
Club chairman and Football League), two executive members of
the Football League Management Committee plus Mr Chase of
Norwich Football Club and Mr Bill Fox, BaWfehreyFootba 11
Club. Bert Millichip Chairman of the FA was also in
attendance for part of the time.
We went through the questions raised in the correspondence
sent to the Football League and the FA from Lord Justice
Taylor.
The discussion took the form of various disjointed points
having been made from the floor dealt with in a fairly
arbitrary and unstructured fashion. However the main points
emerging from what could be described as ‘agreement! to
answers to the questions by all concerned were as follows?
1.   In terms of existing funding the FL and FA could point
to the matters raised in the Phase 2 wider issues
submissions relating to pool betting duty, FGIT and capital
allowances. The TV contracts with ITV still had 2 \ years to
run and so in respect of future funding LJT would want some
answers. The joint members who were going to see LJT on
21 November would be able to provide them. They could also
fill him in onrecent developments on sponsorship.
2.    There was some debate as to money given by the FA to
the FL. Millichip suggested that a condition should be
attached to the grant that the money was applied to the
safety of grounds or implementing the ID card system. That
would have to go back to the various executive committees.
3.   It was agreed that the financial situation in the game
as a whole had materially changed over the last 5 years.
4.   It was agreed that individual clubs will obviously have
to look at their individual financial positions but the FL
could ask for greater commitment.
5.    In relation to the transfer fees questions we suggested
that the question fell into two halves. Firstly where was
the source of the money and secondly was there are any other
reason other than a fiscal reason why more money was being
spent on transfers rather than safety. As to the source it
was agreed there was no easy answer to this. We then put
the question as to whether we could say anything about those
clubs that had more money being spent on transfer fees than
coming in from players having been sold. Where did they get
the money to spend on players from? We did not get an
answer. It was agreed that the fiscal incentives should be
pushed home as per the wider issues document. Taylor should
be asked to recommend that capital allowance should be
available to clubs for ground improvement. The point was
raised that Taylor may also recommend a tax or levy on the
amount paid on a transfer. Glen Kirton suggested that a
financial statement could be drawn up to explain how the
money circulating in football is broken down between money
spent on players and the amount spent on ground improvement.
There was a suggestion that over the last 4 years £44
million worth of TV money had mainly gone towards players
instead of ground improvement. The point was also made that
it was a business for most clubs at the end of the day and
success meant everything. However it was also agreed that
people ought to be a little bit more visionary since
Hillsborough and look to needs rather than profit. It was
also agreed that 3 people would attend from the League and 3
from the FA to meet on 13 November to sort out the final
script.
6.    With regard to TV contracts it was finally noted that
it may be possible to allocate more money to the safety of
grounds when the next contract is negotiated. For the time
being it had 2 \ years to run. The FL itself had no money.
It was the clubs themselves that funded it. If the
government recommended through the football licensing
authority or safety certificates that certain minimum safety
standards had to be complied with obviously the FL would
co-ordinate this on behalf of the club. Someone mentioned a
Coutts report that the FL had commissioned on ID cards a few
years ago in relation to obtaining finance and there was
also reference to the spot the ball competition which was
contained in the wider issue documents as being a source of
revenue. There was also a levy already charged by FL on
transfer fees. It was thought that a surplus of about £4
million goes back to the clubs themselves after a donation
had been made to a cash benefits scheme for players.
7.   With regard to LJT's questions on a joint organisation
to run football it was agreed that there already is one.
 That was the Football Association which embodied the
 Football League. The Football Association have overall
 responsibility for governing at all levels. The FL was
 properly represented by committee members at each of these
 levels. The executive committee of the FA did most of the
 decision taking. The way the two organisations operated so
 far as it was not clear from the Phase 2 submission would be ,
 fully explained to LJT.
8.   With regard to the question relating to alternative
ideas to combat hooliganism to the Football Spectators Bill
the position that would be put to LJT would be the same that
was in the wider issues document. The voluntary scheme was
advocated. In addition there was going to be a FIFA
requirement in 1993 that any home ground that had a capacity
of 50,000 spectators or where a club was travelling away
with over 3,000 spectators, no standing space would be
permissible within grounds. That would be a great incentive
for more all seater stadiums. The members of the meeting
seemed to think that would sort out all the hooliganism
problems.

9.   Finally Jack Crawford of the FL submitted a discussion
paper for the meeting being points raised from a survey of
clubs taken which had commented on the interim report and
suggested matters that might be raised with LJT.
10. It was agreed that these documents would be taken away
and read by the members. We were provided with copies. LJT
should certainly be given the precis of responses from clubs
who had carried out the recommendations and those who were
still in the process of carrying them out broken down in
percentages. He would certainly be interested in that.
Crawford said he was going to re-work his paper to make it
more relevant to First Division clubs in time for the next
meeting on 13 November.
11. Kelly had mentioned he had already been to see LJT and
flannel and waffle would not be tolerated. He was an
extremely positive and forthright man. He thought that both
the FA and FL ought to stick very closely to what was
hammered out over the summer in the blue wider issues
document. Any deviation from that would lead to the muddied
waters everyone had experienced over the summer and this
afternoon.
12. It was mentioned that the FA and FL were going to see
the Home Secretary Mr Patton on 14 November to iron out the
football membership authority points.
13. A discussion followed as to whether LJT ought to get
any written responses to his letters before the meeting.
Kelly tactfully said that he would write to him saying he
had already responded suggesting this meeting and said that
they would look forward to discussing it further with him on
21 November and in the meantime invite him to tea when he
attends the England Italy match on 15 November. That
concluded the meeting.
Subsequently speaking to Adrian Titcomb and saying that I
had spoken to              who had been to see him that
morning with           |and that I was looking at the OFT
position in relation to the new handbook. In addition we
had had some thoughts about sanctions in relation to failure
to implement any of the recommendations and we would be
phoning him to set up a meeting.
Engaged 4 hours including dictation
