                                         19 July 1989




 FA/HILLSBOROUGH

 I spoke to Adrian Titcombe. He had taken over the crowd
 control portfolio^from Graham Kelly and wondered when we
 would be in a position to sit down and discuss the crowd
 control memorandum and Rule 24. I said both those aspects
 needed careful consideration in the light of the submissions
 and evidence at Hillsborough and in the light of the interim
 report which was expected next week.

 We fixed up a meeting date of 14 August with which to start
 work on this. I said I knew that John Dyson wanted to be
 involved in the drafting.

Adrian was sending out the Phase l FA submission to the
Football League Clubs. I wondered .whether they would be
really interested in most of rfiaflaTrn it. They would only
be interested from paragraph 26 onwards in relation to
interim recommendations. Graham Kelly had however left
instructions to send the whole document. I did not think
that would be a problem because it was public anyway.

 I said one of the issueÂ£ that Graham had been grilled about
was the fact that because of the wording of the 1985
Memorandum on crowd control issued by Ted Croker technically
clubs were in breach of that if they pulled fences down. In
addition if you read the words of Rule 24 literally clubs
would be in breach if people spilled out on to pitches even
as a direct and sole result of crowd safety problems. As a
matter of interpretation Kelly had said that the FA would
not bring proceedings unless a disciplinary offence within
the terms of the Rule had been committed ie in other words
not merely for reasons of safety. However the language need
to be tightened up.

Titcombe said that the AGM would not meet until May of next
year. X said that would probably be too late in terms of
getting revised documents out to clubs. We obviously did
not want to move before Taylor's interim report. I looked
forward to seeing him on 14 August.

Engaged 20 minutes including dictation
