                              BY HAND
                                               5 May 1989
        53/169/30121647




Dear Sirs,

Hillsborough

We refer to our recent telephone conversations and to
your letters of 2 and 4 May.

Our client wishes to co-operate fully with your client
but we are unclear as to the extent to which you wish to
be involved in the preparation of the Football
Association's case for the Inquiry. We understand that
you are proposing to attend the hearing even though daily
transcripts will be available. Perhaps you could let us
know whether you now wish to attend any consultations
with Counsel or meetings with the clients.

As agreed we will let you have copies of the set of
documents prepared for Counsel which you ought to receive
on Monday.  Originally we had understood that you Ttfould
~ome in and inspect documents and take away whatever
copies you thought necessary to your client's interests.
However the tone of your letters of 2 and 4 May seems to
Indicate a change in the level of involvement we
understood you to request from your letters of 13 and
25 April, and our previous telephone conversations.

because of the time pressures involved we are concerned
that we do not find ourselves in the position of having
"o wait to have all the various documents and statements
approved by yourselves. We would require almost
                              BY HAND
                                               5 May 1989
        53/169/30121647




Dear Sirs,

Hillsborough

We refer to our recent telephone conversations and to
your letters of 2 and 4 May.

Our client wishes to co-operate fully with your client
but we are unclear as to the extent to which you wish to
be involved in the preparation of the Football
Association's case for the Inquiry. We understand that
you are proposing to attend the hearing even though daily
transcripts will be available. Perhaps you could let us
know whether you now wish to attend any consultations
with Counsel or meetings with the clients.

As agreed we will let you have copies of the set of
documents prepared for Counsel which you ought to receive
on Monday. Originally we had understood that you would
come in and inspect documents and take away whatever
copies you thought necessary to your client's interests.
However the tone of your letters of 2 and 4 May seems to
indicate a change in the level of involvement we
understood you to request from your letters of 18 and
25 April, and our previous telephone conversations.

Because of the time pressures involved we are concerned
chat we do not find ourselves in the position of having
to wait to have all the various documents and statements
approved by yourselves. We would require almost
Herbert Smith                       5 May 1989          2




immediate responses from you, and whilst not being bound
by your comments our client is quite happy to consider
them. Please confirm that you are prepared to agree with
this. We would repeat that our client is quite happy if
your clients consider that full involvement is necessary,
as long as the preparation of its own case is not thereby
prejudiced.

Yours faithfully,




Herbert Smith
Catling House
35 Cannon Street
London EC4M 5SD
Herbert Smith                       5 May 1989          2




immediate responses from you, and whilst not being bound
by your comments our client is quite happy to consider
them. Please confirm that you are prepared to agree with
this. We would repeat that our client is quite happy if
your clients consider that full involvement is necessary,
as long as the preparation of its own case is not thereby
prejudiced.

Yours faithfully,




isrbert Smith
Catling House
55 Cannon Street
London EC4M 5SD
