              RT. HON. LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR INQUIRY


DISCUSSION PAPER FOR MEETING TO BE HELD AT THE FOOTBALL
ASSOCIATION OFFICES ON WEDNESDAY,   1ST NOVEMBER,   1989.


           The following are raised as discussion notes in
     respect of the above meeting, they are not intended to be a
     definitive response to the inquiry.


           For ease of consideration I have broken it down to
     the two phases:


     a)    comment on the Interim Report and
     b)    suggested matters that might be raised with Lord
     Justice Taylor either by way of a meeting or report.


           The whole must take into consideration what we have
     already said to Lord Justice Taylor in the joint report
     submitted in June, 1989, and the written submission of The
     Football Association - Phase I.


     a) COMMENT ON THE INTERIM REPORT RECOMMENDATIONS


           It is clear from the questionnaires that we asked
     clubs to complete recently that there are varying
     interpretations being placed upon the recommendations and


    ialso that some clubs are suffering considerable
     difficulties in meeting the requirements.



           This is shown more fully in the attached precis of
     the questionnaire.


           The following are the more contentious areas that
     will need to be addressed.
i ) RECOMMENDATIONS 1, 2 & 3 - MAXIMUM CAPACITIES FOR
TERRACES


      These are varying considerably from area to area,
many clubs have had their capacities reduced well above the
15% expected.


      We must bear in mind that in the F.A. Phase I
submission it was suggested that there be a 1%% reduction
from pre-Hillsborough capacities in pens or on terraces
with perimeter fencing.


      It was never envisaged, however, that terraced areas
would be re-assessed by local safety committees using a
much stricter criteria and then have the 15% deducted from
that figure.


      The resultant reductions in terrace capacities have
created many problems for those clubs affected and, in my
opinion, this is a matter we need to raise with Lord
Justice Taylor.


      Recommendation 3(A) is creating particular problems
for smaller club with low gates, in many cases they are
being pressed to introduce sophisticated electronic
equipment to carry out an exercise that could be done quite
easily, and safely, in a more economical way.


ii) RECOMMENDATIONS 4 & 5 - FILLING AND MONITORING TERRACES


      Many police forces are delaying this pending advice
from their lawyers - I understand that A.C.P.O. are
attempting to produce a standardised document for
consideration.




                          - 2 -
      Agreement seems to be the wrong term to use as it
appears to suggest that responsibility in law will rest
with one body - it is too binding and as such, many feel
that there will be a strain placed on the relationship
between the police and clubs.


      A.C.P.O. seem to be following a line of the signed
document being more a statement of intent between the
parties concerned.


      Monitoring of crowds on terraces for overcrowding or
signs of stress is being split between police/stewards -
the real problem is training stewards in this role and
finding sufficient to assume this responsibility.




i i i ) RECOMMENDATIONS 6 TO 10 - FENCES AND GATES


      Training of stewards as suggested is likely to prove
difficult.


      The only area of contention is the interpretation on
the question of open gates in fencing, but it may be that
this is something we might wish to leave to local decision.


      In some areas it has been impossible to comply with
provision of cutting equipment following advice from the
Fire Service.


iv) RECOMMENDATIONS 11 & 12 - CRUSH BARRIERS


      Only comment here is that some local authorities have
taken this literally and have not exercised any discretion
whatsoever.
v)   RECOMMENDATIONS 13 TO 15 - SAFETY CERTIFICATES


       Not presenting a problem for clubs so far - the
setting up of Advisory Groups is slow getting off the
ground and in one or two areas it is being resisted.




       There is concern that the Advisory Group might -if
not tightly controlled - take over responsibilities of
Safety Committee and we could see Councillors being
involved to our detriment.


vi) RECOMMENDATIONS 18 TO 25 - DUTIES OF EACH FOOTBALL CLUB


       The only areas of contention are in the calculation
of the number of turnstiles required, the installation of
further C.C.T.V. Cameras and provision of pre-match
entertainment.


       The number of turnstiles required is difficult to
assess in view of the few near capacity crowds that clubs
can expect, in most cases this can only be done on a
general assessment.


       The long term recommendation that cameras be
installed outside grounds to monitor crowd densities at
turnstiles needs to be treated with discretion in many
cases this would be a gross waste of money that would be
better spent elsewhere.   We have already had one experience
with jumping to install C.C.T.V. too quickly and we must
avoid another mistake in this direction.


       As far as pre-match entertainment is concerned,
reaction to this is lukewarm to say the least - nobody
believes it will make any difference.   A number of clubs
are, however, staging youth matches, penalty competitions,
etc., and it will be interesting to see the result.




                          - 4 -
v i i ) RECOMMENDATIONS 2 6 TO 30 - POLICE PLANNING




      The two areas giving cause for concern are the
provision by police to have sufficient reserves on duty and
the delaying of the kick-off.


      Whilst the incidence of delayed kick-offs has
diminished since the start of the season, consider that it
should be written in that there should be consultation with
Secretary.   In many cases he would be more experienced in
judging rates of flow, etc., through the stiles.


      The provision of the reserve facility could have
serious implications on police charges and this needs to be
given careful consideration.


v i i i ) RECOMMENDATIONS 31 TO 34 - COMMUNICATIONS


      Again, far reaching financial implications if common
sense does not prevail, particularly in the provision of
police rooms and telephone links.


viii) RECOMMENDATIONS 3 5 TO 38 - CO-ORDINATION OF EMERGENCY
SERVICES


      No problem.


x) RECOMMENDATIONS 39 TO 43 - FIRST AID, MEDICAL FACILITIES
AND AMBULANCES


      The question of employment of medical practitioner(s )
is causing problems in some areas and it may be that we
require to raise this.


      Ambulance cover is proving more expensive than was
hitherto expected - we seem to be at the mercy of Ambulance
Authorities who, in some areas, are making unreasonable
demands.




                          - 5 -
CONCLUSION


         The main implications of the recommendations are the
interpretations that individual authorities are placing on
them .


         Unfortunately, we are caught in the middle and it
could cost us a lot of money if it is not kept under
c ontrol.


         Lord Justice Taylor's recommendations do not take
account of the fact that the configuration of grounds
differ widely and as such, to group a ground with a
capacity of 5,000 and an average attendance under 2,500
with grounds in excess of 30,000,                           .


(b) MATTERS THAT MIGHT BE RAISED WITH LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR


1) CAPACITIES ON TERRACES


         Need for greater flexibility in assessing capacities.


2) PERIMETER FENCING


         More definitive direction on use, etc.


3) INCREASED SEATING


         Is what has been offered sufficient, do we need to
review it?


4) POLICING OF STADIA


         Costs and levels of police are escalating - only
alternative seems to be to pursue possibility of using
'professional' stewards or Security Firms.




                           - 6 -
5) MANAGEMENT RESPONSIBILITIES


        Written agreement?


6) NATIONAL I.D. CARD


         Should we press him to suggest a National I.D. Card
to replace the National Membership Scheme and Scheme being
volunteered by the Licensed Victuallers Associations.


7) LIAISON WITH SUPPORTERS' ASSOCIATIONS


        Do we need to firm up on this?


8) KICK-OFF TIMES


        Need for consultation with Secretary.


9) MEDICAL FACILITIES


        Clarification of need for 2nd Doctor - ambulance
cover.


10) PLANNING APPLICATIONS


        Co-operation of Government required in respect of
sites for new grounds and improvements to existing ones.


H)   FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE FROM GOVERNMENT


        Should we press for taxation relief, etc.


        The above are matters which readily come to mind,
many are covered in the Phase 2 joint report but it may be
considered that in the light of experience we can expand on
them.
                MATTERS RAISED BY LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR


LETTERS DATED: 25TH SEPTEMBER AND 2ND OCTOBER.


i) TRANSFER FEES


       How do we approach this - we have the model prepared
that shows the transfer of Gascoine to Tottenham and how
the money obtained by Newcastle United Football Club is
then spread through the Leagues?


       Money received by way of transfer fees in respect of
lower Divisions is, presumably, the only way they can do
improvements etc.


       Successful teams bring revenue through the gate -
more money to spend on improvements?


ii) THE FUNDING OF SAFETY IMPROVEMENTS


       Football Trust,
       F.G.I.T.,
       Tax Incentives.


i i i ) JOINT ORGANISATION TO RUN FOOTBALL


       Pass.


iv) FOOTBALL SPECTATORS BILL - ALTERNATIVES TO NATIONAL
MEMBERSHIP SCHEME


       Continued use of voluntary scheme, family schemes,
etc, with encouragement to clubs to increase areas.


      Greater use of away members schemes.

      Ako+/&.
                towards reduced capacities on terraces and
increased seated ar e a s .




                              -   a   -
      Firmer policing and stewarding policies.


      Community programmes and education of young f a n s .


      Improvement on facilities at grounds.


      More extensive use of- powers by Courts to deal with
convicted persons.




27th October, 1989.
