                THE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION


WEMBLEY STADIUM - STRATEGIC ISSUES

NOTES OF A MEETING HELD AT WEMBLEY STADIUM ON WEDNESDAY,
19TH APRIL.

Present were representatives of Wembley Stadium pic,
Metropolitan Police, The Football Association and London
Borough of Brent.

I was delayed leaving The Football Association offices
and therefore arrived at the meeting some 15 minutes
after it had commenced.  Items 1, 3 and 4 had been dealt
with before I arrived.  They were in the process of
discussing Item 5 and Item 2 had been deferred until my
arrival.

REVISED STADIUM CAPACITY

The Police Representatives stressed that it was essential
to have appropriate controls to prevent illegal entrance
to the Stadium.  There seemed to be some confusion as to
the number of tickets that had been printed for the Rugby
League Cup Final as opposed to the number of tickets that
were available.  Wembley Stadium endeavoured to clarify
the position by stating that some 3,000 of the tickets
being allocated TO the Rugby League were tickets that
that League would probably not wish to use as they would
have an obstructed view.

There was also a discussion concerning the fact that
Wembley were unable to provide a regular computer readout
as to the number of people who were entering the Stadium
through the various turnstiles.  Wembley did stress that
whilst they could not install a system immediately, they
would certainly bear the comments in mind and would be
looking at the possibilities of providing a computer
readout in the very near future.

POLICE SUPPORT AT MATCHES AT THE STADIUM IN CONJUNCTION
WITH STEWARDS; LIAISON WITH FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION

The Football Association had requested that this item be
included on the agenda following the discussions at the
briefing meeting regarding England V Albania.  At that

                                             /Cont/.
                           - 1 -
meeting, reference had been made to a service agreement
between Police and Wembley Stadium which would mean that
there would be virtually no police presence in the
perimeter area of.the pitch.

The Police confirmed that they do now have a special
service agreement with Wembley Stadium and during
discussions in the preparation of that agreement it was
felt that the perimeter of the pitch should be staffed by
the stewards.   The Police would control the terraces, the
circulating corridors and the turnstiles.   As well as the
perimeter pitch area, it was felt that the packing of the
bays was a job for the stewards.   There was a very brief
reference to the fact that the bays should be packed from
the proper area.

Wembley then responded and indicated that they had been
under the impression that there would be an agreement
whereby 20 police would be at each end, although some of
these would be reserves.  The Police stated that the
reserves would be carrying out other duties and would
only be called to the perimeter area in front of the
terracing if there was a need.

On behalf of The Football Association I indicated that
The Association would wish there to be a police presence
in the perimeter pitch area.

The Police reiterated that wherever possible they will be
reducing the number of officers required for the staging
of a football match and made reference to the
considerable increase in police costs.  I asked whether
the police looked at each match individually and, if it
was felt there was a need, would break away from the
Special Service Agreement and increase the number of
police on duty.

The Police reaffirmed that each match would be dealt with
on its own merits and if there was a requirement to
increase the operational numbers, this would be met.

LIQUOR LICENSING

Reference was made to the fact that Wembley had applied
for a Liquor Licence for the Olympic Gallery area and
this had been refused by The Brent Council.  It was noted
that Wembley might be appealing against this decision.

                                               /Cont/.
                          - 2 -
The Football Association confirmed the position with
regard to the sale of  low-alcohol lager at theAlbania
game but said that this was a subject that was
continually under review and they would continue to take
note of the observations of other interested parties,
i. e. police, etc.

REVIEW OF FIRST MAJOR EVENT OF SEASON

Reference was made to  the fact that on the evening of The
Littlewoods Cup Final, Wembley had arranged a Pop Concert
at the arena and this caused considerable traffic
congestion when the departing traffic from the
Littlewoods Cup Final met the in-coming traffic for the
Pop Concert.  The Police pointed out that it was their
traffic officers that were taking most of the abuse and
they thought that a combination of a big event at the
Stadium and another big event at the arena on the same
day were incompatible with general safety.

Brent shared the concerns of the Police and said the
matter will have to be addressed from the point of view
of licensing events for the arena.

Wembley stated that they had to look at it from a
business point of view and they would certainly wish to
use the arena on dates when there were big events at the
Stadium.

It was agreed that Wembley and Brent would have to have
"meaningful" discussions on this subject.

There was some discussion concerning the problems which
had arisen in the Olympic Gallery on the occasion of the
Littlewoods Cup Final.  It would seem that Wembley were
not licensed to use this area, but in fact, "standby"
people had been placed in the area.  Because the Gallery
was not expected to be used, it had not been " cleaned" of
rubbish and the Police pointed out the danger of having
people in this area with an opportunity to throw rubbish
onto the people below.

Wembley confirmed that they would keep this continually
under review.



                                                /Cont/.

                           - 3 -
UPDATE ON FOOTBALL SPECTATORS BILL

It was agreed that it would not be appropriate to have a
detailed discussion on this in view of recent
developments and statements which were being made in
Government circles.

FUTURE WORKING RELATIONSHIPS - COUNCIL/STADIUM

Brent referred to continuing "hiccups" between the
Council and Wembley Stadium.   Brent indicated that a
major hiccup recently related to the failure to clean the
Wembley Stadium area after the Littlewoords Cup
Final.   Apparently in 1988, Wembley had paid at the rate
of £2,000 per clean-up but, unilaterally the Officer of
Brent had decided to increase this to £5,500 per
clean-up.    Brent said that they received a telephone
call the Thursday prior to the Littlewoods Cup Final
saying that Wembley wished to cancel the clean-up and
this instruction had come through from                 I
Wembely denied that this call had been made and said that
the usual Brent clean-up had not been carried out on the
Saturday prior to the fixture and then it did not take
place on the Monday.

Since that time, negotiations have taken place and the
two parties have now reached agreement.  However, both
parties agreed that there was a necessity to avoid these
situations as far as possible to ensure the smooth
running of events at the Stadium.

ANY OTHER BUSINESS

(a) Hillsborough

    There was brief reference to the tragedy at
    Hillsborough on 15th April and the possible need to
    rethink one or two points with regard to the staging
    of events at Wembley Stadium, i. e. the sale or
    non-sale of alcohol within the Stadium;   the sale or
    non-sale of tickets on the day of an event and the
    amount of publicity that should be given to all
    ticket events and to those events where tickets
    would be on sale on the night; the areas where
    tickets should be sold to cash buyers.

                                         . .. /Cont/. . .

                          - 4 -
   There was a discussion as to the advisability of the
   evening matches at Wembley Stadium being put back
   to say an 8.30 kick-off. |              ^suggested that
   the large majority of those people attending evening
   fixtures were "local" and would not be deterred by a
   later kick-off.  Research suggested that it may be
   feasible to stage the weekend match at mid-day
   instead of at 3 pm, one of the reasons being to
   decrease the number of hours an individual could be
   drinking alcohol prior to the kick-off.

    One of the suggestions for dealing with ticket sales
    on the night of the match was to sell tickets from
    the arena box office instead of from the turnstiles.

   There was a reference to the apparent practice in
   some Police Forces for individuals who turned up
   without a ticket to an all-ticket match being
   admitted into the ground, as the Police found them
   easier to control within the ground.    It was stressed
   that it would be beneficial if all Forces could work
   according to the same guidelines, i. e.   that if a
   match is all-ticket and individuals turn up
   without tickets, they should not be admitted to the
   ground.

    It was also felt that to change and perhaps improve
    pre-match entertainment may be another way to
    encourage spectators to enter a stadium well before
    kick-off.

(b) It was the personal view of one of the Police
    Officers present was that we should not have fences
    any more.

    Wembley stressed that their staging of a fixture and
    their means of fencing and exits from the fencing was
    entirely different to that at Hillsborough.




Subsequent to the main meeting. I hade a brief meeting
with                                   and
representatives of Wembley to discuss the ticketing for
Albania.  It was agreed, subject to confirmation by Graham
Kelly, that the standing bays at each end should be

                                               /Cont/.
                          - 5 -
reduced by 1,000 to ensure that there could be no
suggestion by the media that we had packed people
insensitively following the Hillsborough Tragedy.

               advised me that 3,341 tickets would be
available for the Cup Final in the Olympic Gallery.

It was agreed that if The Football Association received
any calls from people organising school parties to the
Albania match, they should be referred to Wembly Box
Office so that Wembley Box Office could make it clear the
area in the Stadium where they would be seated. If the
head of the school party still wished to cancel his
tickets a refund would be given.

I referred to the PA Address System and pointed out that
we needed to make sure that this was as clear as possible
for the forthcoming matches.                of Wembley
did say that they would look at this problem and
endeavour to improve the Address System for the
forthcoming matches.

I advised Wembley I would let them know nearer the time
whether we wished to have the Steel Bands in the area
just outside the Stadium prior to the Cup Final as had
happened in previous years.

With regard to collections specifically related to the
Hillsborough Disaster Fund, Wembley and The Football
Association agreed that these should be supported and in
all probability other people who had originally been
given approval to have collections would propably step
down in favour of the Hillsborough Fund collectors.

It was agreed that once we were certain there was going
to be a Cup Final that further thought needed to be given
to the possibility of reducing the numbers in the
standing bays for the Cup Final.



PS
21st April 1989


CC:   R H G Kelly,          Glen Kirton, Adrian Titcombe,
                                      and Freshfields


                          - 6 -
                            LONDON BOROUGH OF BRENT

WF.MBLEY STADIUM - STRATEGIC ISSUES
NOTICE OF MEETING TO BE HELD AT BRENT TOWN HALL IN COMMITTEE ROOMS
ON MONDAY 17TH APRIL AT 2.30 PM
Involving Representatives of Wembley Stadium PLC, Metropolitan Police, Football
Association and London Borough of Brent
AGENDA

1      Minutes of meeting held at Wembley Stadium on 10th January 19S9

2      Police support at matches at the Stadium in conjunction with stewards; liaison
       with Football Association
3      British Transport Police - Wembley Park

4      Progress of Stadium alterations and new projects

5      Revised Stadium capacity      6UD,
6      Liquor Licensing

7      Review of first major event of season

8      Update on Football Spectators Bill

9      Future Working Relationships -Council/Stadium

10     Any Other Business
11     Venue/Date of Next Meeting
