THffOOTBfllL SUPPORTfRS ASSOCIATION
                  MERSEYSIDE FSA BRANCH COMMITTEE MEETING

                              MINUTES

                                                 The Railway, 4.12.89

Present: Peter Jackson, Nigel Grant, Barry Stone, Paul Hyland,
Paul Kelly, Shiela Spiers, Chris Owen, Marie Rossiter, Shelagh
Williams, Roger Scoon;

Apologies:
                              * * * * * * * *


                                                            Action - if nec.
1.   Minutes   of previous megtlng - approved.

2.   Matters   arising therefrom -
     (i)   Approach to Maghull Town F.C. - deferred to next
           meeting.

     (ii) Reminder to Peter Robinson re speakers - this
          was also deferred until next meeting in view
          of some success on the question of speakers.

     (iii)Venue for committees - Roger Scoon stated that
          we could have use of a committee room at the
          University free of charge if it was booked in
          his name (£10 otherwise).
           Paul Kelly agreed to contact              at             PK
           the Bradford to sort out long-term arrange­
           ment with them.  He stated that he'd tell them
           we were considering moving if they persisted
           with the threat to charge us.

     Treasurer's report - Shiela reported the followings
           Balance of account as at 4.12.89 = £ 335.00
           Monies owed to national office        32.00
           I.e. accessible funds as 4.12.39 = £ 303.00

           Shiela also reported that Barclays had replied
           to her to effect that they’re only prepared to
           regard us as a small business - therefore no
           point in changing.

           'Blow Football' fanzine - it was agreed we'd
           sell them all before sending off the monies
           taken in respect of sales.                                    ss
                     P.O. Box 11 Liverpool L26 1XP
                              -2-

Continued/....

 3. (Cont'd . )

    Shiela raised the question of a conflict of interests between
    the selling of merchandise and the selling of raffle tickets.
    This concern was shared by the committee and it was therefore
    agreed that the branch must ensure that it retained its lOp
    per fanzine sold.                                                  s s /m r

4 * Secretary's report - Nigel reported the following:

       (i)    He had written to the Daily Mirror following represe­
              ntations by members who wanted the paper to publish
              a public apology for its slur on Merseyside in its
              piece on the policing arrangements for the Arsenal v.
              Liverpool Littlewoods Cup match.  It was agreed that
              the matter should be taken no further.
       (ii)   He had taken up w i th Liverpool F.C. a complaint on
              behalf of                  A reply had been received
              and a copy was to be passed to                            NG
       (iii) The meeting was informed that the letter to British
              R^il re 'the graffiti outside Lime Street station
              had received a positive reply and that the graffiti
              had since been removed.
       (iv)   A letter had been written to Chris Patten, the
               Environment Minister, expressing the branch's support
               for Hammersmith and Fulham Council’s application        NG to
               for a Compulsory Purchase Order which would prevent     keep
               Cabra Estates, who presently own the freehold fox       branch
               Fulham F.C.'s Craven Cottage ground, redeveloping the   posted
               ground without making-;,.provision for the club.
       (v)    The fanzine 'What's The Score' had been written to
              and tcld that their publication was not considered
              suitable for sale at branch meetings.

5 * Sub-branch report - Roger reported that the Guild had given
             the University branch a grant of £250 and that it
             could therefore survive independent of financial
             help from the main branch until the end' of the season.
             On behalf of the University branch, Roger expressed
             thanks for our offer of financial assistance.
             He also told us of plans for a video night on 23.1.90
             The question of 'Sport Against Racism' being given a
             platform at this meeting was deferred.
              He told us of plans for a memorial plaque to be pre­
              sented to Mr and Mrs Hicks for display at the Uni in
              remembrance of those who died at Hillsborough*   It
              was agreed that Roger should liaise with Rogan and
   ,          Bill Pemberton re a presentation.  The cost of the       RS
              plaque, Roger added, was being met by the Guild.
              Main branch to write to Guild Treasurer Mike Lyons
              offering our assistance, financial or otherwise, on
              this matter.
                                                                       NG/RS
Continued/....


6.   Committee meeting procedures -           following was agreed!-

     (i) only persons permitted to attend branch committee meetings
         would be committee members and FSA National Officers.
     (ii)the committee would reserve the right to invite someone
         else to either all or part of a committee meeting.  This
         would be at the discretion of the committee but the Chair
         would reserve the right to invite an outsider even though
         it may not be practically possible to obtain the approval
         of the committee.  If this happened, the Chair would,
         however, be obliged to inform at least one other committee
         member beforehand.

         IT WAS AGREED THAT ALL THESE POINTS WOULD BE ENSHRINED IN
         THE BRANCH CONSTITUTION. ( see point 8 )

7.   Report back from FSA Council - Nigel gave a brief account of
         what had been discussed at the recent Council meeting in
         Birmingham.  He mentioned:-
           (1)     the position re the direct debit facility
           (2)     the position re the next issue of ’The Football
                  Supporter.’
           (3)    the suggestion that branches could possibly act
                  as sub-committees looking at specific issues.    The
                  meeting expressed the Merseyside branch's willing­
                  ness to act' as such a sub-commit tee.
           (4)     thesuggestion - made by Steve Beauchampe of tfee ,
                  West Midlands branch at Council - that we should
                  liaise with our local NCCL office re the West
                  Midlands police issue.
           (5)    the issue of a workshop tutored by Rogan in which
                  interested FSA members would learn how to deal
                  with the media.   Eight members expressed an initial
                  interest in participating in such an event and it
                  was therefore agreed that Nigel Grant should pass
                  the names on to National Secretary Martin Jones.
           (6)    the request from National Chair Tony Goulbourn
                  for branch updates for the next issue of ’The
                  Football Supporter’. Shelagh Williams said she
                  would oblige with this.

8.   Rules and Constitution

        A branch Rules and Constitution incorporating the points
        highlighted in point 6 (above) and containing a number of
        minor alterations to the model circulated beforehand was
        adopted.  Nigel Grant to pass copy to National Secretary
,       Martin Jones.

9.   Points arising from November meeting -
         (i)     it was agreed that a committee member should always
                 put the first question to a guest speaker.          The
                 identity of the questioner and the nature of the
                 question to be discussed and agreed beforehand to
                 the satisfaction of the— o a t-iof act ion ’Of- the Chair.
                 It was further agreed that other committee members
                 available to put pre-arranged questions too.
                                 _4-


Continued/....

9. (Cont* d.)
      (ii)   A microphone and amp would be required for the Duncan
             McKenzie meeting on 3th January.  Paul Kelly agreed
             to ask Pete Garrett ©r, if unsuccessful, to provide
             these himself.
10. December meeting -
      (i)    It was agreed this would be a Christmas Quiz Night
             and Social.  There would be no charge for entry to
             the quiz since it was felt this might reduce the
             monies taken in the raffle.   Shiela Spiers promised
             to provide the raffle prizes.
      (ii)   It was agreed that publicity for the event would be
             along the usual lines and that the order of events
             on the night would be as normal i.e.national and
             local updates before main event during which there
             would be an interval.
      (iii) Barry Stone agreed to assist Marie on merchadise
            s tand.

11. Speakers for future, meetings -

             Several names came up in the course of the dis­
             cussion on this point.  Current picture is as
             follows:
             Pat Nevin - unable to oblige for December; still
             apparently willing in principle; March therefore
             seems best bet.  Roger to progress.
             Alex Fynn - approached by Nigel for December meet­
             ing but unavailable.
             Alex/Dave Watson - Possibilities owing to Tom Sim-
             nor knowing the Watson family.  Shiela to progress.
             David Fairclough - fixed up by Barry to speak at
             February 11th meeting.  Reminder to be sent 7-10
             days before event.
             Simon Inglis - Nigel reported that he had met Simon
             Inglis and that h e ’d expressed a willingness to
             speak subject to his rail fare from London being
             re-imbursed.  Pencilled in for April 1990. Nigel to
             progress.

12.    Hillsborough -
             Pete Jackson, Paul Kelly and Shiela Spiers provided
             committee with account of trip to Sheff Wed v. Liver­
             pool match on 29.11.89.
             As a follow-up, Pete Jackson said h e ’d draft a letter
             and send it through.Hill Dickinson to Lord Justice
             Taylor.
             The branch representatives made contact with the
             Middlewood Road Shops Committee in the course of the
             trip and, consequently, Shiela agreed to write to its
             Secretary Mick Baxter to express the branch's thanks.
                                 -5-

Continued/. . . .

12.   (Cont *d. )

      It was reported that we'd been invited to speak to the
      Hillsborough Survivors Group and it was therefore agreed
      the entire committee should go some time in the New Year
      to take up this offer.                                          All
13. Meetings with Everton F.C. -

      Shelagh Williams indicated that she'd drafted a letter to
      Fhilip Carter suggesting a meeting between ourselves and
      either himself or Mr Greenwood.  Nigel to type up and
      send off, retaining copies for relevant individuals.            NG
14. Newsletter -

      The second newsletter would, it was agreed, be put together
      by Nigel and passed to Barry for photocopying in time to
      allow it to be handed ou~t to members attending the 11th Dec
      meeting.  It was agreed it\should be restricted to one page
      to minimise photocopying arid that those members who did not
      attend the 11th Dec meeting would Tiave their copies posted
      on to them afterwards.                                          n g /b s

15. Pre-match entertainment -

      Discussion took place on the points raised in the Anglia
      branch's paper which the Secretary had circulated before­
      hand.  It was agreed that the branch's views on the topics
      referred to should be relayed back to the Anglia branch.
      Nigel Grant to ensure this happens.                              NG
16. A.O.B. -        v

      (i)   Shiela gave an update on the museum question at the
      moment.   It appeared at the present time, she reported^to be
      a non-starter.
      (ii)  It was agreed that we should offer members wishing to
      purchase FSA diaries at the Dec 11th meeting the opportunity
      to delay payment until the January meeting.                     s s /m r

      (iii) I"t was agreed that we should write to Mr Lyons regard­
      ing a meeting between ourselves and the police.                 s w /n g




             NEXT MEETING = Thursday, January 4th (2 9pm
                            Venue to be confirmed.
