                                   cc   Miss P Edwards
                                        Mr Addison
                                        Mr Bolton
                                        Miss A Edwards
                                        Mr Cogbill
                                        Miss Goose
                                        Mr Grant
                                        Mrs Lee
                                        Mr Crawley, SHHD
                                        Mr McClelland, NIO

Mr Goddard. F8

TAYLOR REPORT

Thank you for your minute of 22 June.  I think you will need
to sound a note of caution in your submission about the
desirability and prospects of including provisions
implementing recommendations of the Taylor Report in the
Criminal Justice Bill.

2.   In the negotiations with the Lord President to secure the
inclusion of the Criminal Justice Bill in the programme, the
Home Secretary undertook that the contents of the Bill would
be closely limited.  The Bill is meant to be a coherent
measure dealing mainly with the sentencing reforms and related
measures set out in the White Paper "Crime Justice and
Protecting the Public" (cm 965) and with enabling powers for
private sector involvement in the remand system.

3.   This is not of course an absolute bar to the addition of
other subjects if they are considered politically important
enough to merit it.   I can see that the Taylor Report is
something to which Ministers might wish to give a high
priority in arguing for an extension of the scope of the
Criminal Justice Bill.   But there are other potential
candidates, such as the video recording of childrens evidence,
the Calcutt Report on privacy and related matters, a possible
offence of prison mutiny following the Strangeways riot, and
Right to Silence.   Indeed, my list of subjects which have been
mentioned as possible additions to the Bill now runs, with the
Taylor Report, to 18 subjects.

4.   The Lord President has made it clear that he would
require a compelling case to be made out before he would
sanction any additions to the presently agreed contents of the
Bill.Ministers will therefore need to take a view on whether
such a case can be made out for the Taylor recommendations,
and if so what priority legislation on this subject should be
given in relation to the other candidates for inclusion.

5.   There is also a somewhat more technical point that a
Criminal Justice Bill is concerned with the way in which
justice is administered, rather than with the substance of the
criminal law - i.e. the creation, amendment and repeal of
offences.  If we include offence creating provisions, others
     be able to table amendments which create new offences
f




    without these being ruled outside the scope of the Bill.
    Ministers should be aware that this may make the handling of
    the Bill harder, because amendments would have to be resisted
    on their merits which would otherwise have been rejected as
    being out of order.




                                       P R FULTON
                                       25 June 1990




    Criminal Justice Bill Unit

â€¢   Room 1101
    Queen Anne 1s Gate
    273 3545

    690.RF
