 30-2.JS
                                                        cc: Mr Chilcot
                                                            HMCIC
                                                            Mr Boys Smith
 From:          J L Goddard
                F8 Division
                Ext. 3314

                9 February 1990




  Mr Hammond
  Mr Addison
  Mrs Reisz
  Mrs Catto
Jjj| Cane
 t I ss Goose
  Mr Cogbill
                                      Jkx           ,                 /:
                                                 ' |i *J(y tofa h
 TAYLOR REPORT:       POLICE ISSUES
                                      Ifm.   ty . i , â–  M      i >        -i
                                      Q k.      (fmit- * (hmJC jjmd' ^ y ta Ujuds.
 Mr Chilcot has asked me to co-ordinate the Police Department1s
 response to the final Taylor Report. As a first move I have
 prepared the attached draft letter for Mr Boys Smith1s                         %
 signature to go to Mr Anderton in his capacity as Chairman of
 the ACPO Sub-Committee on Hooliganism at Sporting Events. I
 should be grateful for any comments you may have on the draft
 to be made to me within a couple of days so that I can put
 forward a final version to Mr Boys Smith on Wednesday 14
 February.


 2.   Mr Hammond, Miss Goose. and Mr Cogbill will note that
 with regard to the recommendations (70-73) for some new
 offences and penalties the draft is no more than a holding
 operation. I propose to discuss further with the three of you
 the substantive letter which it promises. Mr Addison1s
 concern is with recommendation 53 about charging. Mrs Reisz
 may wish to look at recommendation 48 about arrest procedures
 although I have not thought it necessary to draw particular
                                                                    1




E.R.
   attention to this in the draft. Mrs Catto's main interest is
   in recommendation 52 for training senior officers. Mr Cane I
   have assumed would have the main interest in recommendations
   54-58 dealing with communications and, in particular, a
   dedicated command channel. However, if this matter would be
   more properly handled by someone else perhaps he could let me
   know.


   3.   For ease of reference I attach a copy of the Taylor final
   recommendations and one of the schedule placed in the Library
   of the House setting out the Government's response to them.


   4.   I have built into the draft letter to Mr Anderton an
   ^ldication that we shall be wanting to monitor the police
   response: the draft suggests a meeting, perhaps around
   Easter, when Mr Boys Smith and I and those of you who wish
   might meet with ACPO and review progress.


   5.   If it is more convenient for you to make any comments on
   the draft by telephone to me this will, of course, suffice.




                            J L GODDARD
29-2.JS

DRAFT LETTER FOR SIGNATURE BY MR BOYS SMITH




 C J Anderton Esq CBE CStJ QPM CBIM
 Chief Constable
 Greater Manchester Police
 PO Box 22 (S West PDO)
 Chester House
 Boyer Street
^pNCHESTER M1 6 ORE




LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR'S FINAL REPORT


On 29 January the Home Secretary made a statement in the House
about the final report of Lord Justice Taylor's inquiry into
the tragedy at the Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April 1989. In
his statement the Home Secretary referred to a schedule placed
in the Library of the House setting out the Government's
response to each of the recommendations set out in Chapters 3,
4 and 5 of the report. I enclose a copy of the schedule.


You will see that the Government accepts these proposals.    The
purpose of this letter is to ask you formally to bring the
recommendations and the Government's response to them to the
attention of ACPO. I have no doubt that ACPO will wish to
encourage chief officers to proceed quickly to take any
necessary action to implement the recommendations directed at
the police service. Many of the recommendations substantially
repeat those made in the interim report to which the police
service made a notably prompt and positive response for which
the Home Secretary was grateful.
There are a number of recommendations to which I wish to make
particular reference.


Recommendation 11 revises to some extent interim
recommendation 4. It is now made clear that the agreement
setting out the club's and the police's respective functions
as to crowd safety and control is seen as a statement of
intent, not a binding contract. Paragraph 214 of the report
says explicitly, "I am content that [the document] can be
subject to alteration without breach of contract should
circumstances so demand." I hope that the re-formulation of
this crucial recommendation will ease the problems that I know
  re seen to arise from the wording of the interim
  commendation.


Recommendations 19 and 20, dealing with the closure and
manning of gates provide greater flexibility than did the
earlier interim recommendations (9 and 10). It will now be at
local discretion whether the perimeter gates are left fully
open, partially open or closed but unlocked. Also for local
decision, by the Police Commander, will be whether the manning
of a perimeter gate should be by a police officer or a
steward. This new flexibility is no doubt desirable for
operational reasons but it does underline the need for a clear
agreement about such matters to be embodied in the statement
of intent agreed between the police and the club.


Turning to the batch of recommendations (44-58) covering
police planning and communications, these will no doubt all
receive carefuly consideration, but I pick out three which are
of particular concern to the Home Office.


Recommendation 52 dealing with the training of present and
future Police Commanders is another key one of this group. I
presume that your own sub-committee and the Training Committee
have an interest here. Within the Police Department Gay Catto
will be following this up with you or whoever you advise her
is the appropriate contact.
 Recommendation 53 deals with charging for police service.
 James Addison will be following up the Government's response
 to this recommendation through his normal contacts with the
 police service and police authorities.

 Recommendation 55 for the provision of a dedicated command
 channel seems to be crucial to effective police control.


 Recommendations 59-63 cover co-ordination of the emergency
 services. I simply wish to reiterate the Government's
 response that those concerned will be urged to comply with the
^^commendation (61) not repeated from the interim report.


There are two more general matters which call for some
comment. Firstly, recommendation 42, directed at clubs, calls
for a significant change in the recruitment, training and
eventual quality of stewarding. There are obvious
repercussions here for the call on police resources. The Home
Secretary made this connection in his response to a question
following his statement when he said, "I therefore wholly
applaud Lord Justice Taylor's recommendation that stewards
should be trained so that fewer police officers are required
at grounds".


 Second, Taylor's recommendations (70-73) for some new offences
 and penalties call for careful study. The Home Secretary has
said that he will be examining these recommendations as a
matter of urgency. John Goddard will shortly be writing to
 you separately on these matters but I can say now that we
 shall want to take careful account of ACPO's views on the
 enforceability and resource implications for the police of
 implementing these recommendations.


If you think it would be helpful to discuss any of the matters
raised in this letter or any other issues arising from the
Taylor report I should be glad to arrange a meeting here with
 those concerned.   We shall, of course, be reporting back to
Ministers on the response by the police service to Taylor in
due course and a meeting with you at that stage, [perhaps
after Easter,] would provide a convenient opportunity for you
to bring us up to date.
