    K fW                                             HOME OFFICE
                                              Queen Anneâ€™s Gate London SW1H 9AT
                                                     Direct line: 01-273
                                                    Switchboard: 01-273 3000


    Our reference:    FEP/88 6/233/8               10 November 1988
    Your reference:



I
           The Chief Executive
           County Councils
           Metropolitan District Councils
           London Borough Councils
           Common Council of the City of London



           Dear Sir
           HOME OFFICE CIRCULAR NO 96/1988
           FIRE SAFETY AND SAFETY OF PLACES OF SPORT ACT : PART III - SPORTS
           GROUNDS - CERTIFICATION OF STANDS AND THE SAFETY OF PLACES OF
           SPORT REGULATIONS 1988

           Introduction

           1.   This circular, together with annexes A - D, introduces the
           provisions of Part III of the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of
           Sport Act 1987 (the 1987 Act) and the Safety of Places of Sport
           Regulations 1988, which come into force on 1 January 1989. A
           copy of the Commencement No 4 Order, under which Part III comes
           into force, is enclosed.

           Implementation

           2.   Part III is the final phase of implementation of those parts
           of the 1987 Act dealing with spectator safety at places of sport
           in line with the Government's proposals contained in the
           Consultative Document published in 1986. It brings into effect a
           system of safety certification and subsequent inspection of
           stands able to accommodate under cover at least 500 spectators
           ("regulated stands") at sports grounds not designated as
           requiring a safety certificate under section 1 of the Safety of
           Sports Grounds Act 1975 (SSGA). Detailed advice on Part III,
           section by section, is contained in Annex A. A suggested format
           for a notice of determination that a stand is a regulated stand
           is at Annex D.

           3.   Action taken by local authorities in response to HOC 5/1986
           to identify stands able to accommodate at least 500 spectators
           should mean that most, if not all, such stands have already been
identified. However, in determining regulated stand status under
Part III of the 1987 Act local authorities are required to act in
accordance with guidance issued by the Secretary of State under
section 26(8). This guidance is being issued, together with
guidance on inspections under section 34 of the 1987 Act, under
separate cover.

Regulations

4.   A copy of the 1988 regulations is enclosed with this
circular. The regulations lay down the procedure for
applications for safety certificates, their issue, transfer,
amendment, replacement and cancellation. The regulations further
authorise local authorities to determine charges in respect of
applications for the issue etc of safety certificates. Time
limits for all appeals to the courts are also prescribed. More
detailed guidance to the regulations is contained in Annex B.

Safety Certification

5.   Supplementary advice on the application of the Guide to
Safety at Sports Grounds (Green Guide) and on the certification
of stands is offered in Annex C.

Resource and Manpower Implications

 6.    The potential variation in regulated stands is such that an
.accurate estimate of the average number of man-days for
 certification is not possible, but reasonable costs can be
 recovered by authorised charges (see paragraph 4 above and Annex
 B ) . The resource implications of inspections under Statutory
 Guidance given under section 34 of the 1987 Act will be dealt
 with separately, as necessary, in the covering circular.

Supplementary

7.   Guidance on the effects of Part III of the 1987 Act intended
for ground management has also been produced. Copies of the
guidance, which local authorities may wish to make available to
local sports ground management, are enclosed. Additional copies
can be obtained from the Home Office if required.

8.   The information and advice given in this circular and
Annexes are given in good faith but it should be understood that
ultimately only the courts can rule authoritatively on points of
law.

9.   Any enquiries about the contents of this circular should be
directed to Miss D Russell 01-273 3406.

                                              Yours          ly



                                                 R R G WATTS
                                             Fire and Emergency
                                             Planning Department
Enclosures:
Enclosures:   Commencement No 4 Order
              The Safety of Places of Sport Regulations 1988
              Guidance for Ground Management on the Operation
               of Part III
              Application Forms for a safety certificate




Copies for information to:-

     Association of County Councils
     Association of Metropolitan Authorities
     London Boroughs Association
     Association of District Councils
     Association of Chief Police Officers
     Clerks to Police Authorities
     Clerks to Fire & Civil Defence Authorities
     Chief Officers of Police
     Magistrates Association
     Justices Clerks Society
     Sports Council
HOC 96/1988    ANNEX A

PART III OF THE FIRE SAFETY & SAFETY OF PLACES OF SPORT ACT 1987:
SAFETY CERTIFICATION FOR REGULATED STANDS AT SPORTS GROUNDS

Introduction

1.   The provisions of Part III of the Fire Safety & Safety of
Places of Sport Act 1987 (the 1987 Act) supplement the provisions
of the Safety of Sports Ground Act 1975 (SSGA) with the aim of
improving the safety of spectators in stands at sports grounds
which are not designated as requiring a safety certificate under
the SSGA. They follow closely the Government's proposals
contained in the Consultative Document published by the Home
Office/Scottish Office in June 1986 in response to the Final
Report of the Popplewell Inquiry.  Part III is brought into force
from 1 January 1989.  It is the final stage of implementation of
the 1987 Act's provisions on spectator safety at sports grounds
and provides for a system of safety certification for stands
determined by the local authority as able to hold 500 or more
spectators under cover ("regulated stands").

2.   Part III provides a regime of safety certification similar
to that under the SSGA but applies only to covered stands which,
in general, were seen by the Popplewell Inquiry as most likely to
pose risks from fire or structural deficiency (or both). The
provisions of Part III apply to all types of sports ground as
defined in section 41 of the 1987 Act and section 17 of the SSGA.

General approach

3.   The safety certificate forms the main instrument of control
under Part III of the 1987 Act. There are two sorts of safety
certificate, general and special. The general certificate is the
main mechanism and is to be issued for an indefinite period for
specified activities taking place at the sports ground. A
special safety certificate may be issued for a specified event or
events not covered by the general certificate. A safety
certificate is required for each regulated stand that is to be
used by spectators for viewing activities at the sports ground.
It is the local authority who determine, subject to a right of
appeal to the courts, whether a stand is a regulated stand and
issue a safety certificate. The stand in question remains a
regulated stand unless the local authority subsequently determine
otherwise.  Supplementary advice on safety certification is
contained in Annex C.

4.    In determining whether a stand is a regulated stand (ie able
to accommodate 500 or more spectators under cover) local
authorities are required to act in accordance with any guidance
issued by the Secretary of State .under section 26(8). Such
guidance has been issued under cover of Home Office Circular 97/
1988.   Local authorities are also required, under section 34, to
arrange for the periodic inspections of sports grounds which
contain regulated stands in accordance with guidance from the
Secretary of State. Such guidance has also been issued under
cover of Home Office Circular 97/1988.
SUBSTANCE OF PART III OF THE 1987 ACT

Section 26 : Safety   certificates for stands at sports grounds

5.   Section 26 provides for the new system of safety
certificates for stands at sports grounds. Under subsection (l)
Part III is applied to all sports grounds which

     a.    provide covered accommodation in stands for spectators,
     and

     b.    are not designated under section 1 of the SSGA.

Under subsection (2) a safety certificate is required in respect
of the use of each stand which provides covered accommodation for
500 or more spectators to view activities at the around (known as
a "regulated stand" under subsection (5)). Where more than one
regulated stand exists at a sports ground the local authority may
issue one certificate to cover all such stands. The figure of
500 can be varied by the Secretary of State by Order subject to
negative resolution   procedure of Parliament (subsections (3) and
(4)). There are no    plans at the present time to obtain suchan
Order.

6.   Local authorities may care to note that it is only when a
stand is used for the purpose of viewing activities at the ground
that a safety certificate is required. The use of a stand for
some other purpose, such as an internal activity (eg an
exhibition) would not require a safety certificate under Part
III.

7.   Subsection (6) places the function of determining whether a
stand is a regulated stand and the      issueof a safety certificate
on the local authority who, under subsection (7), may apply any
appropriate criteria but who, under subsection (8), must act in
accordance with any guidance from the Secretary of State. This
guidance has been issued under the      coverof Home Office Circular
97/1988. Under subsection    (9) the    finaldetermination of the
local authority, subject only to an appeal to the courts (see
paragraphs 19-20 below) concludes the question of whether a stand
is a regulated stand. This mechanism, together with service of
notice of the determination under section 28(2) on the
"responsible person" (see paragraphs 11-14 below) ensures that a
safety certificate must be applied for if the stand is to be used
by spectators for viewing activities at the ground.

8.   Paragraphs (a) and (b) of subsection (10) describe
respectively "general" and "special" safety certificates as
defined in subsection (11). Here again local authorities may
wish to note that a safety certificate for a stand relates to the
use of the stand for viewing an activity or activities.
Subsection (11) provides self-explanatory definitions.  "Stand"
includes the uncovered portion of the structure for certification
purposes.  It will be noted that by use of the phrase "(not
merely temporary)" the definition of "stand" excludes from
certification temporary stands.
Section 27 : Contents of safety certificates for stands

9.   Subsection (1) requires a safety certificate to contain such
terms and conditions as the local authority consider necessary or
expedient to secure reasonable safety in the stand and which may
involve alterations or additions to it or any installations in or
serving it (for example cables, ducts, plant equipment). There
are no obligatory terms and conditions. However, under
subsection (2) safety certificates must include terms and
conditions required by an Order made under section 39 which
enables the Secretary of state to make an Order modifying the
provisions of Part III as they apply to any particular class of
stand. No Order has been made under this section and there are
no current plans to do so. (see paragraph 33 below)

10. Subsection (3) precludes conditions in safety certificates
relating to police presence unless the extent of the presence is
reserved for determination by the chief officer of police.
Subsection (4) provides that a certificate may include a
condition on the keeping of records relating to attendance (in
practice this would apply only where access to the stand is
controlled, see Annex C) and the maintenance of safety in the
stand.  Subsection (5) requires a general safety certificate to
include a plan of the stand or stands to which it applies and the
area in the immediate vicinity of it/them. Terms and conditions
in any safety certificate should be framed where appropriate by
reference to that plan. Subsection (6) allows for different
terms and conditions to be included in the safety certificate for
different activities taking place at the ground. Subsection (7)
ensures that safety certificates do not derogate from any
requirements imposed by any regulations made under section 6(2)
of the SSGA. No regulations have been made under that section
and there are no current plans to do so.


Section 28 : Issue of certificates

11. This section identifies to whom safety certificates should
be issued, lays down procedures for determining whether a stand
is a regulated stand, and for the issue of certificates.
Subsection (1) sets out who qualifies for a safety certificate.
In the case of a general safety certificate this is the ground
management;  for a special safety certificate it is the person
organising the activity at the ground in question.  In many
cases, of course, the holder of the general safety certificate
will also qualify to hold the special safety certificate.

12. Under subsection (2), where it appears to the local
authority that a stand at a sports ground in their area is a
regulated stand, they have to make a preliminary determination on
whether or not the stand is a regulated stand.  If the local
authority determine that it is, they must then issue a notice of
determination and the effect of it on the person who appears to
qualify for the general safety certificate (ie the person who
appears to qualify under subsection (l)(a)). A suggested draft
notice of determination is attached at Appendix D.
13. Subsection (3) provides that the preliminary determination
becomes a final determination after two months.  Subsection (4)
allows for revocation of that determination at any time before it
becomes final or on consideration of an application for a safety
certificate. These two subsections allow ground management an
opportunity to discuss and review with the local authority any
information or proposals which might cause the local authority to
revise their determination and save recourse to the appeal
procedure. Subsection (5) allows the local authority to withdraw
(rather than revoke) the notice of determination before it
becomes final and serve it on a different person - for example
where information has come to light meantime indicating that
there has been a change in the management of the ground. When a
fresh notice is served the two month period under subsection (2)
begins again.

14. Subsection (6) lays a duty on the local authority to make
certain determinations on applications for general safety
certificates.   (Subsection (10) (see below) imposes certain
procedural requirements on the local authority on receipt of such
an application.)   Subsection (6)(a) provides for applications for
general safety certificates which are made otherwise than in
response to a notice served by the local authority under
subsection (2); such applications would be made where the
applicant is of the opinion that the stand in question is a
regulated stand. Under subsection (6)(a) the local authority
must determine whether the stand in question is a regulated stand
and, if it is, whether the applicant qualifies for the general
safety certificate. A determination under (6)(a) that a stand is
a regulated stand is immediately a final determination.
Subsection (6)(b) concerns an application for a general safety
certificate in response to a notice served by the local authority
under subsection (2). Provided that the local authority do not
then decide to revoke their preliminary determination that the
stand is a regulated stand (in the light of further information)
they must determine whether the applicant is qualified to hold a
general safety certificate. Once these issues have been resolved
a general safety certificate must, under subsection (7), be
issued to a qualified applicant unless such a certificate is
already in operation in which case an application should be made
under section 29(5) for the transfer of the certificate.

15. Subsection (8) concerns the issue of a special safety
certificate.  Such a certificate is only issued if there is
already a general safety certificate in operation. The local
authority have a discretion as to whether or not to issue a
special safety certificate.

16. In all cases where a local authority determine that an
applicant for a safety certificate does not qualify for one they
must serve on him notice under subsection (9) stating their
determination.

17. Subsection (10) requires the local authority to send a copy
of an application for a safety certificate to the chief officer
of police and, where the local authority is in Greater London or
a metropolitan county, to the fire authority; elsewhere, a copy
must be sent to the building authority. The local authority must
also consult these authorities about the terms and conditions to
be included in the certificate.

18.  Subsection (11) enables the local authority to serve a
notice on an applicant requiring such information or plans etc as
they consider necessary to issue a safety certificate. The plan
could be for an area larger than the stands. Subsection (12)
provides that if an applicant fails to comply with the
requirement for information or plans within any time specified in
the notice or as extended by the local authority his application
will be deemed to have been withdrawn. Thereafter, if a fresh
application is not made and spectators are admitted to a
regulated stand an offence will be committed under section 36.


Section 29:   Amendment, cancellation etc of certificates

 19. Subsection (1)(a) provides for the cancellation of a safety
 certificate where it appears to the local authority who have
 issued it that the stand in question is not or has ceased to be a
 regulated stand - for example if the original determination was
 mistaken or if the covered accommodation is reduced to below 500.
 In these circumstances subsection (1)(a) requires the local
 authority to revoke the determination and, by notice to the
 holder, cancel the safety certificate. Subsection (1)(b) enables
 the local authority to amend the terms and conditions of the
 safety certificate by notice to the holder, and subsection (1)(c)
.enables them to replace the safety certificate. Subsection (2)
 enables the powers under subsection (l)(a) - (c) to be exercised
 without an application from the holder (see also paragraph 21
 below). Subsection (3) applies the provisions of section 27 to
 an amended or replacement safety certificate. When the local
 authority amend a certificate under subsection (1)(b), the notice
 must, under subsection (4), specify the operative date of the
 amendment which can be later than the date of the notice. This
 enables the local authority to anticipate completion of any
 remedial work or delay operation of a condition to allow for
 changes to be made.

20. Subsection (5) concerns the transfer of safety certificates.
It places a duty on the local authority to determine whether a
person is qualified to have a safety certificate issued to him on
transfer from the holder (see paragraph 11 above) and notify him
of the determination.  If the person is qualified the safety
certificate may be transferred to him. Application for transfer
may be made by the holder or by the person to whom transfer is
proposed (subsection (6)).

21. Copies of the application must be sent by the local
authority to the chief officer of police and, where the local
authority is in Greater London or a metropolitan county, to the
fire authority, and elsewhere to the building authority
(subsection 7). These authorities must also be consulted on any
proposal to amend, replace or transfer the safety certificate
(subsection (8)).

22. Subsection (9) provides for the surrender of a safety
certificate whereupon it ceases to have effect. Subsection (10)
gives a local authority discretion to cancel a safety certificate
if the holder dies or, if a body corporate, is dissolved.


Section 30 :    Appeals

23. All appeals under Part III are to the courts. Subsection
(1) gives a right of appeal against a final determination that a
stand is a regulated stand. Subsection (2) provides a right of
appeal against a determination that an applicant is not qualified
(or would not qualify in the case of transfer) for the issue of a
safety certificate.  Subsection (3) confers a right of appeal
against a refusal by the local authority to issue a special
safety certificate (other than on grounds of qualification).
Subsection (4) gives "interested parties", who are defined in
subsection (8), the right of appeal against

     a.   inclusion of anything in or omission of anything from a
     safety certificate;

     b.   refusal to amend or replace a safety certificate.

All appeals have to be brought within the period prescribed by
Regulations made under section 31, in England and Wales by way of
complaint for an order to a Magistrates Court (subsections (5)
and (6)).

24. Under subsection (9) where a local authority have served
notice on an applicant of their determination that he does not
qualify for the issue of a safety certificate he is, unless he
appeals, deemed to have withdrawn his application once the appeal
period has expired (see also paragraph 26 below on offences under
section 36). Subsection (10) identifies the deemed date of
withdrawal of an application in the case of an appeal which is
not upheld by the court or is withdrawn by the applicant.
Subsection (11) suspends the operation of any term or condition
in a safety certificate pending an appeal, and subsection (12)
prescribes who, in addition to the local authority, may appeal to
the Crown Court against an Order by the Magistrates Court.


Section 31:    Regulations

25. Under this section the Secretary of State is empowered to
make regulations prescribing the procedures and application
particulars for the issue etc of safety certificates, authorising
local authorities to determine fees in connection with such
applications and prescribing the time limits for appeals. The
regulations may also contain such incidental and supplementary
provisions as the Secretary of State thinks expedient.
Regulations under section 31 have been made and come into effect
from 1 January 1989 (see Annex B for further details).

Section 32:    Alterations and Extensions

26. Subsection (1) requires the holder of a general safety
certificate to notify the local authority of any proposed
alteration or extension to a regulated stand or its installations
which is likely to affect the safety of people in the stand
before he begins to carry out the proposals. Subsection (2)
emphasises the need for such a notice in relation to entrances
and exits and means of access and escape. The purpose of this
section is to guard against any alterations being made without
the local authority's knowledge and which might affect the safety
of spectators.  Failure to give notice is made an offence by
section 36(7)(b).


Section 33:   Exclusion of other statutory requirements

27.  Subsection (1) harmonizes Part III with other legislation by
disapplying provisions of several Acts whilst a general safety
certificate for a regulated stand is in force. Subsection (2)
suspends the operation of any term or condition in a licence
relating to a matter which is also covered by the safety
certificate for as long as the certificate is in operation.
Subsection (3) ensures that a person failing to meet a
requirement of a local Act will not commit an offence under that
Act if meeting the requirement would involve a contravention of
the terms or conditions of a safety certificate.


Section 34:   Enforcement

28.  Subsection (1) provides for local authorities to enforce the
provisions of Part III and to arrange for periodical inspections
of sports grounds at which there are regulated stands. Such
inspections shall (by virtue of subsection (2)) be in accordance
with any guidance by the Secretary of State. This guidance has
been issued under cover of Home Office Circular 97/1988.


Section 35:   Powers of entry and inspection

29.   This section confers for the purposes of Part III a right of
entry to a sports ground at any reasonable time on persons
authorised by the local authority, chief officer of police, in
London or a metropolitan county the fire authority, elsewhere the
building authority, to inspect the stands and make any necessary
enquiries. Authorised persons may be required to produce their
authority and may examine and copy records relating to regulated
stands.   The powers under this section apply to all sports
grounds and are in addition to powers under section 11 of the
SSGA.


Section 36:   Offences

30.  Paragraphs (a) and (b) of subsection (1) create an offence
if spectators are admitted to a regulated stand on an occasion
when no safety certificate covering their use of the stand is in
operation (see paragraphs 5, 6, and 8 above); or if any term or
condition in a safety certificate is contravened. The offence is
committed by the "responsible person" as defined in subsection
(3) and, if the safety certificate is in operation, the holder of
it. No offence is committed if the local authority have not made
a final determination or if application for a safety certificate
has been made and it has not been withdrawn or deemed to have
been withdrawn (subsection (2)). Subsection (4) provides for
penalties on conviction and subsection (5) provides a defence on
the grounds of proof that spectators were admitted or the
contravention took place without the defendants consent and that
he took all reasonable precautions and exercised all "due
diligence" to avoid commission of the offence by himself or any
person under his control. Subsection (6) provides a defence for
a responsible person on the grounds of proof that he did not know
the stand was a regulated stand (for example if notice had not
been served on the right person). Subsection (7) creates
offences in connection with the provision of information under
sections 28(11) and 32(1) or obstruction under section 35.
Subsections (8) and (9) apply the offence provisions to a body
corporate its officers and members.


Section 37:   Civil and other liability

31. This section limits the effects of the provisions of Part
III in civil proceedings, and on requirements in public, local or
private Acts or in rights of action to those provided expressly
in Part III.


Section 38:   Service of documents

32. This section makes provisions for the service of notices or
other documents required or authorised under Part III.
Subsection (1) makes general provision for such service,
subsection (2) deals with service on corporations or partnerships
and subsection (3) identifies the address to which notices or
documents are to be sent.


Section 39:   Power to modify Part for classes of stand

33. Subsection (1) enables the Secretary of State to modify the
provisions of Part III in the way they should be applied to any
specified class of stand. The power is exercised by Order
subject to negative resolution (subsection (3)) and after
consultation (subsection (4)). Under subsection (2) different
modifications can be made for different activities at a sports
ground and may include such supplementary or transitional
provision as considered expedient. Section 39, together with
section 27(2), would enable the Secretary of State to stipulate
that terms and conditions of a safety certificate should take
account of different ways in which stands are used by spectators
(see paragraph 9 above). It is an important reserve power which
is unlikely to be necessary provided terms and conditions of
safety certificates are framed to take account of the differences
experienced and observed within the stands at different sorts of
sports grounds (see also Annex C ) .
Section 40:   Application to Crown

34.  Subsection (1) applies sections 26 to 29 to premises
occupied by the Crown but substituting for the reference to a
local authority a reference to the Secretary of State who will
therefore be responsible for the certification of such premises.
Subsection (2) provides that nothing within Part III authorises
entry of premises occupied by the Crown.


Section 41:   Interpretation

35. This section provides self-explanatory definitions of words
used in Part III.




Home Office
Fire and Emergency Planning Department
G1 Division
HOC 96/1988 ANNEX B




PART III OF THE FIRE SAFETY & SAFETY OF PLACES OF SPORT ACT 1987:
THE SAFETY OF PLACES OF SPORT REGULATIONS 1988


General

1.   The Safety of Places of Sport Regulations 1988 (1988
Regulations) under section 31(1) and (2) of the Fire Safety and
Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987 (1987 Act) have been made and
come into force on 1 January 1989. The 1988 Regulations are
similar to, but distinct from, the Safety of Sports Grounds
Regulations 1987 (S.I.1987/1941). Terms and expressions used in
the 1988 Regulations, eg safety certificate, therefore have the
same meaning as under section 41 of the 1987 Act and refer to
Part III of that Act, not the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975.
They prescribe the form and procedures for applications for
safety certificates under Part III, provide for the issue of
notices of certain decisions and authorise local authorities to
charge fees for work done by them or on their behalf in
connection with applications for issue etc of safety
certificates. The Regulations also prescribe the time limits for
appeals against local authority decisions taken under Part III.


Substance of Regulations


2.   Regulations 1 and 2 concern citation and interpretation.
Regulation 3 deals with applications. Paragraph (1 ) of
Regulation 3 and the Schedule to the Regulations prescribe the
form in which applications for the issue of a safety certificate,
either a general or special certificate, are to be made. For a
general safety certificate the application form envisages that it
will be accompanied by details of the stand including the plans
where available.  For a special safety certificate details of the
stand will already be known from the general safety certificate
application but additional information about the activities and
any changes proposed as a result of those activities may be
required by the local authority. Applications for both general
and special safety certificates are directed at providing
infonnation about the stand when it is used by spectators for
viewing activities at the ground (not when it is used for some
other purpose such as an exhibition or conference for which a
safety certificate is not needed). Applications should also
provide details of the status of the applicant to enable the
local authority to determine whether he qualifies to hold a
certificate.  Paragraph (2) lays down that applications for
cancellation, amendment, replacement or transfer of a safety
certificate have to be made in writing and, except for
cancellation, details must be given by the applicant of anyone
who is believed to be concerned with ensuring compliance with
terms and conditions of the safety certificate.
3.   Regulation 4 deals with notices of decisions taken by the
local authority. Notices issued under Regulation 4 are in
addition to those issued under the 1987 Act itself by the local
authority. Under paragraph (1) of Regulation 4 the decisions
described in (a) - (c) must be notified by notice in writing to
the interested parties (as set out in paragraph (8)). The notice
must also include details of when and where a copy of the safety
certificate and a copy of the relevant application may be
inspected (paragraph (6 )). In the case of a refusal decision
under (c) the reasons for the refusal should be included in the
notice.

4.   Paragraph (2) requires the local authority to issue notice
on an applicant who has been refused a special safety certificate
other than on the grounds that he is not a qualified person. The
notice should include reasons for the decision.

5.   Paragraph (3) is concerned with the transfer of certificates
and requires the local authority to serve on the holder of a
safety certificate a copy of any notice issued under section
29(5) of the 1987 Act.  (This ensures that both the holder and
the would-be holder of the safety certificate are aware of the
adverse decision.)  Similarly, where it is decided that the
applicant is qualified to hold a certificate but it is decided
not to transfer it, that decision must be notified to both the
applicant and the holder giving reasons for the decision.

â€¢6.   Paragraph (4 ) requires the local authority to serve notice
 on an applicant of any decision to refuse an application for the
 cancellation of a safety certificate under section 29(1)(a) of
 the 1987 Act and giving reasons for the decision; and paragraph
 XÂ§1 requires the local authority to serve a copy of the notice of
 the decision on the other interested parties as soon as
 practicable thereafter. Paragraph (6 ) provides that the notice
 should include the information of when and where a copy of the
 safety certificate and any application may be inspected.

7.   Paragraph (7) requires local authorities to publish a notice
in a local newspaper setting out the decision taken under
paragraph 1 above. The publication should include the
information of when and where a copy of the safety certificate
and any relevant application may be inspected (as in
paragraph (6)). Paragraph (8 ) defines "interested parties".


8.   Regulation 5 lays down the time limits for appeals under
section 30 of the 1987 Act. Paragraph (1 ) lays down the time
limit of 28 days in the case of an appeal against a determination
that a stand is a regulated stand. This period is calculated
from the date when any preliminary determination becomes a final
determination under section 28(3) of the Act (paragraph (1)(a))
or in the case of a final determination under section 28(6) the
date of the receipt of the notice of that determination
(paragraph (1)(b)).
9.   Other appeals under the 1987 Act must under paragraph (2) of
Regulation 5 be brought within 28 days in the case of a general
safety certificate and 7 days in the case of a special safety
certificate from the "relevant date". Paragraph (3) of
Regulation 5 sets down what is meant by the "relevant date".


10.  Regulation 6 deals with fees. Paragraph (1) of Regulation 6
enables local authorities to determine the fee to be charged in
respect of an application (whether or not successful) for the
issue, amendment, replacement or transfer of a safety certificate
or in respect of an application for the cancellation of such a
certificate for a stand which has ceased to be a regulated stand.
Paragraph (2 ) provides that any fee must not exceed an amount
commensurate with the work actually and reasonably done by or on
behalf of the local authority.




Home Office
Fire and Emergency Planning Department
G1 Division
HOC 96 /1988 ANNEX C



PART III OF THE FIRE SAFETY AND SAFETY OF PLACES OF SPORT ACT
1987 : ISSUE AND CONTENT OF SAFETY CERTIFICATES


Introduction

1.   This Annex provides some additional advice on the issue and
content of safety certificates which local authorities may care
to take into consideration when drawing up safety certificates
for regulated stands under Part III of the Fire Safety and Safety
of Places of Sport Act (the 1987 Act). Although directed at
certification under Part III, the underlying principles of the
advice in this Annex may also assist local authorities when
reviewing terms and conditions to be contained in safety
certificates for sports grounds designated under the Safety of
Sports Grounds Act 1975 (SSGA). Local authorities may find it
useful to cross-reference this Annex with Annex A to Home Office
Circular 71/1987 and Annexes C and D to Home Office Circular No
7/1986 - some of the advice of which is reproduced below.

2.   The following advice is given in good faith but it should be
remembered that only the courts can interpret on points of law.


Reasonable Safety

3.   Part III of the 1987 Act, like the SSGA, provides that terms
and conditions within safety certificates should be such as are
considered necessary or expedient to secure reasonable safety.
It would probably be unreasonable, even if it were practicable,
to seek the absolute safety of everyone occupying a stand at a
sports ground. The courts might also be sympathetic to an appeal
against a term or condition which entailed expenditure on
measures to combat a risk which was seen to be remote or did not
arise at all at the particular ground or stand. Local
authorities should therefore consider operating on the principle
that the addition to safety which any particular measure will
produce needs to be balanced against its cost. In some cases
certain measures may have to be taken whatever the cost,
irrespective of the size or profitability of the undertaking.
But where the difficulty and cost of the remedy are high, and
careful assessment shows the risk is not significant, it may not
be necessary to insist on action?  if the risk is significant it
may be possible to opt for a solution which will reduce it to an
acceptable level at modest cost.


General

4.   An application for a general safety certificate under Part
III should normally be accompanied by information about the
stand, a proper plan of the stand and its installations. In
practice, not all the information necessary to draw up a safety
certificate will always be provided at the time of the initial
application. However, local authorities are able to require, by
notice, under section 28(11) further details to enable them to
consider the application. For an application for a special
safety certificate under Part III much information would already
be available from the general safety certificate application;
but additional information may be required if, for example, the
activities which are to take place at the sports ground for which
a special safety certificate is needed are such that the
spectator accommodation in the stand is altered or affected.

5.   A special safety certificate under Part III is issued at the
discretion of the local authority (subject to a right of appeal).
There is no time limit in which a safety certificate, whether
general or special, has to be issued. However, a special safety
certificate will need to be issued before the event, allowing
time for any appeal. Local authorities may therefore wish to
give ground management advice on the likely time scale which will
be needed and to remind them that a last minute application might
constitute sufficient grounds for refusal.  In general an
application lodged 3 months before an event should give
sufficient time for the procedures (including an appeal) to be
carried out. Local authorities may nonetheless feel able to
agree to a shorter period where they are satisfied that the
application can be finalised within the lesser period of time
given.


Consultation

6.   It is envisaged that consultation between the local
authority and ground management will take place in drawing up the
terms and conditions to be contained within any safety
certificate issued under Part III. In this way much valuable
information can be obtained in order to apply the principles of
the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds (the Green Guide) so as to
meet the safety needs of the particular stand(s) at the ground in
question (see also paras 9-15 below). Local authorities will be
aware of the statutory requirement to consult the police and, in
London and metropolitan counties, the fire authority, elsewhere,
the building authority, and are reminded of the potential
advantages of a safety team approach as a way of ensuring that
the professional knowledge and skills of the various disciplines
can be brought to bear on drawing up a safety certificate.


Scope and content of safety certificates

7.   Provision is made in section 27(6) for different terms and
conditions to be included in a general safety certificate for a
stand for different activities at the ground. Where a ground is
used for several activities local authorities may therefore wish
to include, as far as possible, all the activities within the
general safety certificate, reserving the need to issue a special
safety certificate for a "one off" event when the viewing
arrangements are likely to be affected in such a way as to
require additional considerations and safeguards which cannot be
included in the general safety certificate. Section 27 does not
have to vary to meet different needs, but as a general rule local
authorities may wish to consider inclusion of terms and
conditions which address

     a.   structural stability where elements of the stand are
     judged, from preliminary inspections, as likely to be
     inadequate for their intended function.

     b.   the maximum number of spectators who should be admitted
     to the stand(s) and different parts of it (them) bearing in
     mind the considerations set out in paragraphs 10 - 13 below;

     c.  the number, size and situation of entrances to and
     exits from the stand(s) or any part of it (them) including
     means of escape in case of fire or other emergency; and the
     means of access to any such entrances and exits;

     d.   requirements for entrances and exits and means of
     access to be properly maintained and kept free of
     obstruction;

     e.   other fire precaution measures;

     f.  the provision for crush barriers, if any, their number,
     strength and location;

     g.   provision for stewards, steward training, fire drill
     procedures, first aid.

    h.   need for records of maintenance, inspections and/or
    tests and training.

8.   If it is evident that a stand is rarely filled to capacity
the local authority may consider it proper to base the safety
requirements on the actual levels of attendance.  In such
circumstances the terms and conditions of the general safety
certificate may not be sufficient for a particularly attractive
event or fixture when a larger than normal crowd can be expected
to attend. As some such fixtures could arise at relatively short
notice, local authorities may wish to work out in advance, the
modifications and/or additional controls to the normal terms and
conditions of the general safety certificate which would enable
an increase in the number of spectators to be accommodated; for
example, an increase in the limit might be conditional upon the
employment of additional stewards, or more sophisticated fire
fighting equipment with trained stewards to operate it.

9.   When drawing up terms and conditions in any safety
certificate local authorities will doubtless keep in mind the
advice of the Green Guide (see paragraphs 10 and 11 below) and
the "reasonableness" of the requirements (see paragraph 3 above).
The quality or standard of measures should be stated so that the
holder knows what is required under what conditions, and does not
have to rely on carrying out work "to the satisfaction of" or "as
may be required by" the authority. Terms and conditions
specifying work needed should include details of the increase in
the permitted spectator limit or, if there is no increase, the
restrictions on the capacity or operation if the work is not
done. The following are two examples of the sort of detail that
might, with adaptation to suit individual circumstances, be
included in a term or condition.


Example A.  (Where it is a condition that attendance records are
kept to a standard required by the authority).

"[Except as mentioned below] the holder shall keep a record [in
the form contained in Appendix   of this certificate] for [each]
[the] regulated stand to which this certificate applies of the
number of spectators admitted on each occasion when the stand[s]
is [are] used for the purpose of viewing the [specified]
activities at the ground [specified below] ...".

If a record is not required for low attendances an additional
clause might be added

"The number of spectators admitted on any occasion need not be
entered in the record described in paragraph   above where on any
occasion the total admission to the ground is certified by the
holder [in the record] as not having exceeded "x" by entering the
words [quote] which should be signed and dated by [the holder]."


Example B (where emergency lighting is the requirement)

"Emergency lighting for use in the event of failure of the
general lighting shall be provided on [exit] route(s) marked [
] on plan [   ] and shall include illuminated exit signs at exits
marked [   ] on plan [   ].

Emergency lighting provided under paragraph    above shall be
installed in accordance with paragraphs 166 to 169 of the Guide
to Safety at Sports Ground [except that .... ].

On completion of the installation a certificate of completion [in
the form specified in Appendix [ ] of this certificate] shall be
obtained from a [specify] and that certificate shall [be retained
by the holder] [sent within [x days] to the authority].

Until installation as required in paragraph    above is carried
out and a certificate obtained as in paragraph    above [exit
route/s marked [   ] on plan [   ] is/are not to be used by
spectators] [the number of spectators who are to be admitted to
the stand is restricted to [   ]] [and areas marked [    ] on plan
[   ] are not to be occupied].

On completion of installation and on obtaining a certificate of
satisfaction required in paragraphs [   ] above exit routes
marked [   ] on plan [   ] may be used and the number of
spectators who may be admitted to the stand is increased to [   ]
[and the area(s) marked [   ] on plan [   ] may be used by
spectators.]"
Application of the Green Guide
10.    The Guide is not a statutory code providing a set of rigid
requirements to be applied in all cases irrespective of the
individual circumstances. The diversity of regulated stands is
likely to be considerable, varying from basic, covered terracing
at, say, non-league football or rugby grounds to large, complex
buildings offering a variety of facilities to many thousands of
spectators. The advice in the Guide has therefore to be applied
to the situation that is seen to exist at a particular ground
having taken account of such factors as location, size,
construction, condition, together with the activities undertaken
at the ground, the numbers and density of spectators who occupy
the stand or stands and their movement patterns. The following
examples may help to illustrate how the Guide might be
interpreted without jeopardising reasonable safety.

     i.   Where it is known that the safe limit of the stand will
     not be exceeded (eg because total attendances are within
     that limit) there may be no necessity to regulate the
     admission or, in the case of standing accommodation, to
     require internal division in order to control the dispersal
     of spectators.  In such circumstances, the number, strength
     and layout of barriers (if any) for standing areas need only
     reflect the number and density of the spectators to be
     accommodated.

     ii. A partly roofed, open sided, terrace allowing quick
     movement away from the covered area may not need fire-
     warning/detection systems.

     iii. The strength requirements for protective guard-rails on
     stairs, gangways or exit routes and balustrading in front of
     a row of seats may well vary. The last of these is not, for
     example, usually subjected to high pressures. Similarly,
     side or end rails to seating rows will need to be designed
     to accommodate the forces to which they may be subjected.
     These may also vary and account should be taken of
     individual circumstances.

     iv. Where it is known that spectators vacate an area of a
     stand more quickly than envisaged by using the Guide's
     (notional) calculations, that knowledge may be taken into
     account when assessing requirements for safe egress from a
     stand.


Horseracing/greyhound racing

11.   Unlike crowds at some other sports where spectators are
essentially static for the duration of the event, there is a
common requirement for greyhound and horseracing spectators to be
mobile, with free movement to various internal parts of the stand
or racecourse to which they are admitted. Local authorities may
find that this mobility requirement regulates the density at
which the spectators congregate on terraced areas to below the
maximum of 54 persons per 10 square metres (paragraph 222 of the
Guide) for "static spectator sports". Even at well attended
meetings, where crowd densities are liable to be high (perhaps
approaching the maximum of 54 per 10 square metres) "surging" is
not generally experienced. Spectators will probably be static
for only a few minutes before moving off to other parts of the
stand or ground. This aspect of spectator behaviour should be
taken into account when considering the safety requirements of
the stand. For example, where barriers are judged to be
necessary at all, their function is most likely to be to channel
or direct safely the movement of spectators on the terrace, and
to mitigate against any "waterfall" effect of someone stumbling
at a critical moment, whilst simultaneously allowing the free
movement desired by spectators in between races. In such
circumstances, continuous barriers (see paragraph 113 of the
Guide) will probably not be the most suitable arrangement, and a
series of staggered short lengths may be appropriate; the
horizontal spacing between barriers should be commensurate with
the forces likely to be generated on the terraced areas.

12. In the case of horseracing, access and egress can often be
gained to and from a stand from the front where it discharges on
to an open "enclosure" area. Except for those parts of the stand
to which entry is gained by additional payment, eg reserved
seating or boxes spectator movement within this enclosure area
(including the stand) is not controlled. As a general rule
therefore it will not be appropriate, or possible, to include
terms and conditions in a safety certificate specifying the
maximum total number of spectators to be admitted to the stand or
requiring records of the total number of spectators so admitted.
This ought not to create undue difficulty especially when the
crowd density on standing areas of the stand is low and such
areas are occupied for relatively short periods of time. It
follows however that in setting terms and conditions geared to
the normal use of the stand the local authority will have to take
account of the possibility that everyone admitted to the
enclosure area may use the stand, - although at any given time
only a proportion of spectators will do so and even then will be
dispersed within it. These considerations may also apply to some
stands at greyhound racing courses.

13. Discussions with local management together with observation
and information about the numbers admitted to the particular
racecourse enclosure or stand at a greyhound racing stadium
should help to form a considered view on the level of use and
dispersal of spectators on which to base the terms and conditions
of the safety certificate. Where a racecourse or greyhound
stadium is occasionally used for a particularly attractive event
the local authority may wish to build into the safety certificate
additional terms and conditions to deal with that occasion as in
paragraph 8 above provided that they are satisfied that such
measures are sufficient to effect reasonable safety for the
number of spectators who are expected to attend.




Home Office
Fire & Emergency Planning Department
G1 Division
HOC 96/1988   ANNEX D



FIRE SAFETY AND SAFETY OF PLACES OF SPORT ACT 1987


NOTICE OF A PRELIMINARY DETERMINATION UNDER SECTION 28(2) THAT A
STAND IS A REGULATED STAND


To




Name (if any) and address of sports ground




Notice is hereby given to                        (who appears to
the                         Council to be the person responsible
for the management of the above-mentioned sports-ground and who
is therefore qualified under section 28(1) of the Fire Safety and
Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987 (the 1987 Act) to hold a
general safety certificate for the regulated stand[s]* at that
sports ground) that the council have made a preliminary
determination under section 28(2) of the 1987 Act that the
stand[s] detailed in the schedule to this notice [is]* [are]*
[a]* regulated stand[s]* under section 26(5) of the Act.     A
regulated stand under section 26(5) is a stand which provides
covered accommodation for 500 or more spectators to view
activities at the sports ground.


The preliminary determination of the council will become a final
determination two months from the date of this notice.     If you
consider that [the stand]* [any of the stands]* detailed in the
schedule to this notice [is]* [are]* not [a]* regulated
stand[s]*, or if you consider you are not qualified to hold a
general safety certificate you should contact the
Council at
without delay with your reasons.
SCHEDULE TO NOTICE



1.   Number of stands to which the notice applies




2.   Name (if any) of each stand:




3.   Location of each stand:




4.   Any other identifiable feature of each stand
                                                     HOME OFFICE
                                              Queen Anneâ€™s Gate London SW1H 9AT
                                                     Direct line: 01-273
                                                    Switchboard: 01-273 3000


    Our reference:    FEP/88 6/233/8               10 November 1988
    Your reference:



I
           The Chief Executive
           County Councils
          Metropolitan District Councils
           London Borough Councils
           Common Council of the City of London



           Dear Sir
          HOME OFFICE CIRCULAR NO 96/1988
           FIRE SAFETY AND SAFETY OF PLACES OF SPORT ACT : PART III - SPORTS
           GROUNDS - CERTIFICATION OF STANDS AND THE SAFETY OF PLACES OF
           SPORT REGULATIONS 1988

           Introduction

          1.   This circular, together with annexes A - D, introduces the
          provisions of Part III of the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of
          Sport Act 1987 (the 1987 Act) and the Safety of Places of Sport
          Regulations 1988, which come into force on 1 January 1989. A
          copy of the Commencement No 4 Order, under which Part III comes
          into force, is enclosed.

           Implementation

          2.   Part III is the final phase of implementation of those parts
          of the 1987 Act dealing with spectator safety at places of sport
          in line with the Government's proposals contained in the
          Consultative Document published in 1986. It brings into effect a
          system of safety certification and subsequent inspection of
          stands able to accommodate under cover at least 500 spectators
          ("regulated stands") at sports grounds not designated as
          requiring a safety certificate under section 1 of the Safety of
          Sports Grounds Act 1975 (SSGA). Detailed advice on Part III,
          section by section, is contained in Annex A. A suggested format
          for a notice of determination that a stand is a regulated stand
          is at Annex D.

          3.   Action taken by local authorities in response to HOC 5/1986
          to identify stands able to accommodate at least 500 spectators
          should mean that most, if not all, such stands have already been
identified. However, in determining regulated stand status under
Part III of the 1987 Act local authorities are required to act in
accordance with guidance issued by the Secretary of State under
section 26(8). This guidance is being issued, together with
guidance on inspections under section 34 of the 1987 Act, under
separate cover.

Regulations

4.   A copy of the 1988 regulations is enclosed with this
circular.  The regulations lay down the procedure for
applications for safety certificates, their issue, transfer,
amendment, replacement and cancellation. The regulations further
authorise local authorities to determine charges in respect of
applications for the issue etc of safety certificates. Time
limits for all appeals to the courts are also prescribed. More
detailed guidance to the regulations is contained in Annex B.

Safety Certification

5.   Supplementary advice on the application of the Guide to
Safety at Sports Grounds (Green Guide) and on the certification
of stands is offered in Annex C.

Resource and Manpower Implications

6.    The potential variation in regulated stands is such that an
accurate estimate of the average number of man-days for
certification is not possible, but reasonable costs can be
recovered by authorised charges (see paragraph 4 above and Annex
B ) . The resource implications of inspections under Statutory
Guidance given under section 34 of the 1987 Act will be dealt
with separately, as necessary, in the covering circular.

Supplementary

7.   Guidance on the effects of Part III of the 1987 Act intended
for ground management has also been produced. Copies of the
guidance, which local authorities may wish to make available to
local sports ground management, are enclosed. Additional copies
can be obtained from the Home Office if required.

8.   The information and advice given in this circular and
Annexes are given in good faith but it should be understood that
ultimately only the courts can rule authoritatively on points of
law.

9.   Any enquiries about the contents of this circular should be
directed to Miss D Russell 01-273 3406.

                                             Yours         ly



                                                R R G WATTS
                                            Fire and Emergency
                                            Planning Department
Enclosures:
Enclosures:   Commencement No 4 Order
              The Safety of Places of Sport Regulations 1988
              Guidance for Ground Management on the Operation
               of Part III
              Application Forms for a safety certificate




Copies for information to:-

     Association of County Councils
     Association of Metropolitan Authorities
     London Boroughs Association
     Association of District Councils
     Association of Chief Police Officers
     Clerks to Police Authorities
     Clerks to Fire & Civil Defence Authorities
     Chief Officers of Police
     Magistrates Association
     Justices Clerks Society
     Sports Council
HOC 96/1988    ANNEX A

PART III OF THE FIRE SAFETY & SAFETY OF PLACES OF SPORT ACT 1987:
SAFETY CERTIFICATION FOR REGULATED STANDS AT SPORTS GROUNDS

Introduction

1.   The provisions of Part III of the Fire Safety & Safety of
Places of Sport Act 1987 (the 1987 Act) supplement the provisions
of the Safety of Sports Ground Act 1975 (SSGA) with the aim of
improving the safety of spectators in stands at sports grounds
which are not designated as requiring a safety certificate under
the SSGA. They follow closely the Government's proposals
contained in the Consultative Document published by the Home
Office/Scottish Office in June 1986 in response to the Final
Report of the Popplewell Inquiry. Part III is brought into force
from 1 January 1989.  It is the final stage of implementation of
the 1987 Act's provisions on spectator safety at sports grounds
and provides for a system of safety certification for stands
determined by the local authority as able to hold 500 or more
spectators under cover ("regulated stands").

2.   Part III provides a regime of safety certification similar
to that under the SSGA but applies only to covered stands which,
in general, were seen by the Popplewell Inquiry as most likely to
pose risks from fire or structural deficiency (or both). The
provisions of Part III apply to all types of sports ground as
defined in section 41 of the 1987 Act and section 17 of the SSGA.

General approach

3.   The safety certificate forms the main instrument of control
under Part III of the 1987 Act. There are two sorts of safety
certificate, general and special. The general certificate is the
main mechanism and is to be issued for an indefinite period for
specified activities taking place at the sports ground. A
special safety certificate may be issued for a specified event or
events not covered by the general certificate. A safety
certificate is required for each regulated stand that is to be
used by spectators for viewing activities at the sports ground.
It is the local authority who determine, subject to a right of
appeal to the courts, whether a stand is a regulated stand and
issue a safety certificate. The stand in question remains a
regulated stand unless the local authority subsequently determine
otherwise.  Supplementary advice on safety certification is
contained in Annex C.

4.   In determining whether a stand is a regulated stand (ie able
to accommodate 500 or more spectators under cover) local
authorities are required to act in accordance with any guidance
issued by the Secretary of State .under section 26(8). Such
guidance has been issued under cover of Home Office Circular 97/
1988. Local authorities are also required, under section 34, to
arrange for the periodic inspections of sports grounds which
contain regulated stands in accordance with guidance from the
Secretary of State. Such guidance has also been issued under
cover of Home Office Circular 97/1988.
SUBSTANCE OF PART III OF THE 1987 ACT

Section 26 : Safety   certificates for stands at sports grounds

5.   Section 26 provides for the new system of safety
certificates for stands at sports grounds. Under subsection (1)
Part III is applied to all sports grounds which

     a.    provide covered accommodation in stands for spectators,
     and

     b.    are not designated under section 1 of the SSGA.

Under subsection (2) a safety certificate is required in respect
   the use of each stand which provides covered accommodation for
500 or more spectators to view activities at the around (known as
a "regulated stand" under subsection (5)). Where more than one
regulated stand exists at a sports ground the local authority may
issue one certificate to cover all such stands. The figure of
500 can be varied by the Secretary of State by Order subject to
negative resolution procedure of Parliament (subsections (3) and
(4)). There are no plans at the present time to obtain such an
Order.

6.   Local authorities may care to note that it is only when a
stand is used for the purpose of viewing activities at the ground
that a safety certificate is required. The use of a stand for
some other purpose, such as an internal activity (eg an
exhibition) would not require a safety certificate under Part
III.

7.   Subsection (6) places   the function of determining whether a
stand is a regulated stand   and the issue of a safety certificate
on the local authority who, under subsection (7), may apply any
appropriate criteria but who, under subsection (8), must act in
accordance with any guidance from the Secretary of State. This
guidance has been issued under the cover of Home Office Circular
97/1988. Under subsection     (9) the final determination of the
local authority, subject only to an appeal to the courts (see
paragraphs 19-20 below) concludes the question of whether a stand
is a regulated stand. This mechanism, together with service of
notice of the determination under section 28(2) on the
"responsible person" (see paragraphs 11-14 below) ensures that a
safety certificate must be applied for if the stand is to be used
by spectators for viewing activities at the ground.

8.   Paragraphs (a) and (b) of subsection (10) describe
respectively "general" and "special" safety certificates as
defined in subsection (11). Here again local authorities may
wish to note that a safety certificate for a stand relates to the
use of the stand for viewing an activity or activities.
Subsection (11) provides self-explanatory definitions.  "Stand"
includes the uncovered portion of the structure for certification
purposes.  It will be noted that by use of the phrase "(not
merely temporary)" the definition of "stand" excludes from
certification temporary stands.
Section 27 : Contents of safety certificates for stands

9.   Subsection (l) requires a safety certificate to contain such
terms and conditions as the local authority consider necessary or
expedient to secure reasonable safety in the stand and which may
involve alterations or additions to it or any installations in or
serving it (for example cables, ducts, plant equipment). There
are no obligatory terms and conditions. However, under
subsection (2) safety certificates must include terms and
conditions required by an Order made under section 39 which
enables the Secretary of State to make an Order modifying the
provisions of Part III as they apply to any particular class of
stand. No Order has been made under this section and there are
no current plans to do so. (see paragraph 33 below)

10. Subsection (3) precludes conditions in safety certificates
relating to police presence unless the extent of the presence is
reserved for determination by the chief officer of police.
Subsection (4) provides that a certificate may include a
condition on the keeping of records relating to attendance (in
practice this would apply only where access to the stand is
controlled, see Annex C) and the maintenance of safety in the
stand. Subsection (5) requires a general safety certificate to
include a plan of the stand or stands to which it applies and the
area in the immediate vicinity of it/them. Terms and conditions
in any safety certificate should be framed where appropriate by
reference to that plan. Subsection (6) allows for different
terms and conditions to be included in the safety certificate for
different activities taking place at the ground.  Subsection (7)
ensures that safety certificates do not derogate from any
requirements imposed by any regulations made under section 6(2)
of the SSGA. No regulations have been made under that section
and there are no current plans to do so.


Section 28 : Issue of certificates

11. This section identifies to whom safety certificates should
be issued, lays down procedures for determining whether a stand
is a regulated stand, and for the issue of certificates.
Subsection (l) sets out who qualifies for a safety certificate.
In the case of a general safety certificate this is the ground
management;  for a special safety certificate it is the person
organising the activity at the ground in question.  In many
cases, of course, the holder of the general safety certificate
will also qualify to hold the special safety certificate.

12. Under subsection (2), where it appears to the local
authority that a stand at a sports ground in their area is a
regulated stand, they have to make a preliminary determination on
whether or not the stand is a regulated stand. If the local
authority determine that it is, they must then issue a notice of
deteraination and the effect of it on the person who appears to
qualify for the general safety certificate (ie the person who
appears to qualify under subsection (i)(a)). A suggested draft
notice of determination is attached at Appendix D.
13. Subsection (3) provides that the preliminary determination
becomes a final determination after two months.   Subsection (4)
allows for revocation of that determination at any time before it
becomes final or on consideration of an application for a safety
certificate.   These two subsections allow ground management an
opportunity to discuss and review with the local authority any
information or proposals which might cause the local authority to
revise their determination and save recourse to the appeal
procedure.   Subsection (5) allows the local authority to withdraw
(rather than revoke) the notice of determination before it
becomes final and serve it on a different person - for example
where information has come to light meantime indicating that
there has been a change in the management of the ground. When a
fresh notice is served the two month period under subsection (2)
begins again.

14. Subsection (6) lays a duty on the local authority to make
certain determinations on applications for general safety
certificates.   (Subsection (10) (see below) imposes certain
procedural requirements on the local authority on receipt of such
an application.)   Subsection (6)(a) provides for applications for
general safety certificates which are made otherwise than in
response to a notice served by the local authority under
subsection (2); such applications would be made where the
applicant is of the opinion that the stand in question is a
regulated stand. Under subsection (6)(a) the local authority
must determine whether the stand in question is a regulated stand
and, if it is, whether the applicant qualifies for the general
safety certificate. A determination under (6)(a) that a stand is
a regulated stand is immediately a final determination.
Subsection (6)(b) concerns an application for a general safety
certificate in response to a notice served by the local authority
under subsection (2). Provided that the local authority do not
then decide to revoke their preliminary determination that the
stand is a regulated stand (in the light of further information)
they must determine whether the applicant is qualified to hold a
general safety certificate. Once these issues have been resolved
a general safety certificate must, under subsection (7), be
issued to a qualified applicant unless such a certificate is
already in operation in which case an application should be made
under section 29(5) for the transfer of the certificate.

15. Subsection (8) concerns the issue of a special safety
certificate.  Such a certificate is only issued if there is
already a general safety certificate in operation. The local
authority have a discretion as to whether or not to issue a
special safety certificate.

16. In all cases where a local authority determine that an
applicant for a safety certificate does not qualify for one they
must serve on him notice under subsection (9) stating their
determination.

17. Subsection (10) requires the local authority to send a copy
of an application for a safety certificate to the chief officer
of police and, where the local authority is in Greater London or
a metropolitan county, to the fire authority; elsewhere, a copy
must be sent to the building authority. The local authority must
also consult these authorities about the terms and conditions to
be included in the certificate.

18.  Subsection (11) enables the local authority to serve a
notice on an applicant requiring such information or plans etc as
they consider necessary to issue a safety certificate. The plan
could be for an area larger than the stands. Subsection (12)
provides that if an applicant fails to comply with the
requirement for information or plans within any time specified in
the notice or as extended by the local authority his application
will be deemed to have been withdrawn. Thereafter, if a fresh
application is not made and spectators are admitted to a
regulated stand an offence will be committed under section 36.


Section 29:   Amendment, cancellation etc of certificates

19. Subsection (1)(a) provides for the cancellation of a safety
certificate where it appears to the local authority who have
issued it that the stand in question is not or has ceased to be a
regulated stand - for example if the original determination was
mistaken or if the covered accommodation is reduced to below 500.
In these circumstances subsection (1)(a) requires the local
authority to revoke the determination and, by notice to the
holder, cancel the safety certificate. Subsection (1)(b) enables
the local authority to amend the terms and conditions of the
safety certificate by notice to the holder, and subsection (1)(c)
enables them to replace the safety certificate. Subsection (2)
enables the powers under subsection (1)(a) - (c) to be exercised
without an application from the holder (see also paragraph 21
below). Subsection (3) applies the provisions of section 27 to
an amended or replacement safety certificate. When the local
authority amend a certificate under subsection (1)(b), the notice
must, under subsection (4), specify the operative date of the
amendment which can be later than the date of the notice. This
enables the local authority to anticipate completion of any
remedial work or delay operation of a condition to allow for
changes to be made.

20. Subsection (5) concerns the transfer of safety certificates.
It places a duty on the local authority to determine whether a
person is qualified to have a safety certificate issued to him on
transfer from the holder (see paragraph 11 above) and notify him
of the determination.  If the person is qualified the safety
certificate may be transferred to him. Application for transfer
may be made by the holder or by the person to whom transfer is
proposed (subsection (6)).

21. Copies of the application must be sent by the local
authority to the chief officer of police and, where the local
authority is in Greater London or a metropolitan county, to the
fire authority, and elsewhere to the building authority
(subsection 7). These authorities must also be consulted on any
proposal to amend, replace or transfer the safety certificate
(subsection (8)).

22. Subsection (9) provides for the surrender of a safety
certificate whereupon it ceases to have effect. Subsection (10)
gives a local authority discretion to cancel a safety certificate
if the holder dies or, if a body corporate, is dissolved.


Section 30 :    Appeals

23. All appeals under Part III are to the courts. Subsection
(1) gives a right of appeal against a final determination that a
stand is a regulated stand. Subsection (2) provides a right of
appeal against a determination that an applicant is not qualified
(or would not qualify in the case of transfer) for the issue of a
safety certificate.  Subsection (3) confers a right of appeal
against a refusal by the local authority to issue a special
safety certificate (other than on grounds of qualification).
Subsection (4) gives "interested parties", who are defined in
subsection (8), the right of appeal against

     a.   inclusion of anything in or omission of anything from a
     safety certificate;

     b.   refusal to amend or replace a safety certificate.

All appeals have to be brought within the period prescribed by
Regulations made under section 31, in England and Wales by way of
complaint for an order to a Magistrates Court (subsections (5)
and (6)).

24. Under subsection (9) where a local authority have served
notice on an applicant of their determination that he does not
qualify for the issue of a safety certificate he is, unless he
appeals, deemed to have withdrawn his application once the appeal
period has expired (see also paragraph 26 below on offences under
section 36). Subsection (10) identifies the deemed date of
withdrawal of an application in the case of an appeal which is
not upheld by the court or is withdrawn by the applicant.
Subsection (11) suspends the operation of any term or condition
in a safety certificate pending an appeal, and subsection (12)
prescribes who, in addition to the local authority, may appeal to
the Crown Court against an Order by the Magistrates Court.


Section 31:    Regulations

25. Under this section the Secretary of State is empowered to
make regulations prescribing the procedures and application
particulars for the issue etc of safety certificates, authorising
local authorities to determine fees in connection with such
applications and prescribing the time limits for appeals. The
regulations may also contain such incidental and supplementary
provisions as the Secretary of State thinks expedient.
Regulations under section 31 have been made and come into effect
from 1 January 1989 (see Annex B for further details).

Section 32:    Alterations and Extensions

26. Subsection (1) requires the holder of a general safety
certificate to notify the local authority of any proposed
alteration or extension to a regulated stand or its installations
which is likely to affect the safety of people in the stand
before he begins to carry out the proposals.   Subsection (2)
emphasises the need for such a notice in relation to entrances
and exits and means of access and escape. The purpose of this
section is to guard against any alterations being made without
the local authority's knowledge and which might affect the safety
of spectators.   Failure to give notice is made an offence by
section 3 6(7)(b).


Section 33:   Exclusion of other statutory requirements

27.  Subsection (1) harmonizes Part III with other legislation by
disapplying provisions of several Acts whilst a general safety
certificate for a regulated stand is in force. Subsection (2)
suspends the operation of any term or condition in a licence
relating to a matter which is also covered by the safety
certificate for as long as the certificate is in operation.
Subsection (3) ensures that a person failing to meet a
requirement of a local Act will not commit an offence under that
Act if meeting the requirement would involve a contravention of
the terms or conditions of a safety certificate.


Section 34:   Enforcement

28.  Subsection (1) provides for local authorities to enforce the
provisions of Part III and to arrange for periodical inspections
of sports grounds at which there are regulated stands. Such
inspections shall (by virtue of subsection (2)) be in accordance
with any guidance by the Secretary of State. This guidance has
been issued under cover of Home Office Circular 97/1988.


Section 35:   Powers of entry and inspection

29.   This section confers for the purposes of Part III a right of
entry to a sports ground at any reasonable time on persons
authorised by the local authority, chief officer of police, in
London or a metropolitan county the fire authority, elsewhere the
building authority, to inspect the stands and make any necessary
enquiries. Authorised persons may be required to produce their
authority and may examine and copy records relating to regulated
stands. The powers under this section apply to all sports
grounds and are in addition to powers under section 11 of the
SSGA.


Section 36:   Offences

30.  Paragraphs (a) and (b) of subsection (1) create an offence
if spectators are admitted to a regulated stand on an occasion
when no safety certificate covering their use of the stand is in
operation (see paragraphs 5, 6, and 8 above); or if any term or
condition in a safety certificate is contravened. The offence is
committed by the "responsible person" as defined in subsection
(3) and, if the safety certificate is in operation, the holder of
it. No offence is committed if the local authority have not made
a .final determination or if application for a safety certificate
has been made and it has not been withdrawn or deemed to have
been withdrawn (subsection (2)). Subsection (4) provides for
penalties on conviction and subsection (5) provides a defence on
the grounds of proof that spectators were admitted or the
contravention took place without the defendants consent and that
he took all reasonable precautions and exercised all "due
diligence" to avoid commission of the offence by himself or any
person under his control.   Subsection (6) provides a defence for
a responsible person on the grounds of proof that he did not know
the stand was a regulated stand (for example if notice had not
been served on the right person). Subsection (7) creates
offences in connection with the provision of information under
sections 28(11) and 32(1) or obstruction under section 35.
Subsections (8) and (9) apply the offence provisions to a body
corporate its officers and members.


Section 37:   Civil and other liability

31. This section limits the effects of the provisions of Part
III in civil proceedings, and on requirements in public, local or
private Acts or in rights of action to those provided expressly
in Part III.


Section 38:   Service of documents

32. This section makes provisions for the service of notices or
other documents required or authorised under Part III.
Subsection (1) makes general provision for such service,
subsection (2) deals with service on corporations or partnerships
and subsection (3) identifies the address to which notices or
documents are to be sent.


Section 39:   Power to modify Part for classes of stand

33. Subsection (1) enables the Secretary of State to modify the
provisions of Part III in the way they should be applied to any
specified class of stand. The power is exercised by Order
subject to negative resolution (subsection (3)) and after
consultation (subsection (4)). Under subsection (2) different
modifications can be made for different activities at a sports
ground and may include such supplementary or transitional
provision as considered expedient. Section 39, together with
section 27(2), would enable the Secretary of State to stipulate
that terms and conditions of a safety certificate should take
account of different ways in which stands are used by spectators
(see paragraph 9 above). It is an important reserve power which
is unlikely to be necessary provided terms and conditions of
safety certificates are framed to take account of the differences
experienced and observed within the stands at different sorts of
sports grounds (see also Annex C) .
Section 40:   Application to Crown
34.  Subsection (1) applies sections 26 to 29 to premises
occupied by the Crown but substituting for the reference to a
local authority a reference to the Secretary of State who will
therefore be responsible for the certification of such premises.
Subsection (2) provides that nothing within Part III authorises
entry of premises occupied by the Crown.


Section 41:   Interpretation

35.  This section provides self-explanatory definitions of words
used in Part III.




Home Office
Fire and Emergency Planning Department
G1 Division
HOC 96/1988 ANNEX B




PART III OF THE FIRE SAFETY & SAFETY OF PLACES OF SPORT ACT 1987:
THE SAFETY OF PLACES OF SPORT REGULATIONS 1988


General

1.   The Safety of Places of Sport Regulations 1988 (1988
Regulations) under section 31(1) and (2) of the Fire Safety and
Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987 (1987 Act) have been made and
come into force on 1 January 1989. The 1988 Regulations are
similar to, but distinct from, the Safety of Sports Grounds
Regulations 1987 (S.I.1987/1941). Terms and expressions used in
the 1988 Regulations, eg safety certificate, therefore have the
same meaning as under section 41 of the 1987 Act and refer to
Part III of that Act, not the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975.
They prescribe the form and procedures for applications for
safety certificates under Part III, provide for the issue of
notices of certain decisions and authorise local authorities to
charge fees for work done by them or on their behalf in
connection with applications for issue etc of safety
certificates. The Regulations also prescribe the time limits for
appeals against local authority decisions taken under Part III.


Substance of Regulations


2.   Regulations 1 and 2 concern citation and interpretation.
Regulation 3 deals with applications.  Paragraph (1) of
Regulation 3 and the Schedule to the Regulations prescribe the
form in which applications for the issue of a safety certificate,
either a general or special certificate, are to be made.  For a
general safety certificate the application form envisages that it
will be accompanied by details of the stand including the plans
where available.  For a special safety certificate details of the
stand will already be known from the general safety certificate
application but additional information about the activities and
any changes proposed as a result of those activities may be
required by the local authority. Applications for both general
and special safety certificates are directed at providing
inforaation about the stand when it is used by spectators for
viewing activities at the ground (not when it is used for some
other purpose such as an exhibition or conference for which a
safety certificate is not needed). Applications should also
provide details of the status of the applicant to enable the
local authority to determine whether he qualifies to hold a
certificate.  Paragraph (2) lays down that applications for
cancellation, amendment, replacement or transfer of a safety
certificate have to be made in writing and, except for
cancellation, details must be given by the applicant of anyone
who is believed to be concerned with ensuring compliance with
terms and conditions of the safety certificate.
3.   Regulation 4 deals with notices of decisions taken by the
local authority. Notices issued under Regulation 4 are in
addition to those issued under the 1987 Act itself by the local
authority. Under paragraph fl) of Regulation 4 the decisions
described in (a) - (c) must be notified by notice in writing to
the interested parties (as set out in paragraph (8 V). The notice
must also include details of when and where a copy of the safety
certificate and a copy of the relevant application may be
inspected (paragraph (6)). In the case of a refusal decision
under (c) the reasons for the refusal should be included in the
notice.

4.   Paragraph (2) requires the local authority to issue notice
on an applicant who has been refused a special safety certificate
other than on the grounds that he is not a qualified person. The
notice should include reasons for the decision.

5.   Paragraph (3) is concerned with the transfer of certificates
and requires the local authority to serve on the holder of a
safety certificate a copy of any notice issued under section
29(5) of the 1987 Act.   (This ensures that both the holder and
the would-be holder of the safety certificate are aware of the
adverse decision.)  Similarly, where it is decided that the
applicant is qualified to hold a certificate but it is decided
not to transfer it, that decision must be notified to both the
applicant and the holder giving reasons for the decision.

6.   Paragraph (4) requires the local authority to serve notice
on an applicant of any decision to refuse an application for the
cancellation of a safety certificate under section 29(1)(a) of
the 1987 Act and giving reasons for the decision; and paragraph
(5) requires the local authority to serve a copy of the notice of
the decision on the other interested parties as soon as
practicable thereafter.  Paragraph (6 ) provides that the notice
should include the information of when and where a copy of the
safety certificate and any application may be inspected.

7.   Paragraph (7) requires local authorities to publish a notice
in a local newspaper setting out the decision taken under
paragraph 1 above. The publication should include the
information of when and where a copy of the safety certificate
and any relevant application may be inspected (as in
paragraph (6)). Paragraph (8 ) defines "interested parties".


8.   Regulation 5 lays down the time limits for appeals under
section 30 of the 1987 Act. Paragraph fl) lays down the time
limit of 28 days in the case of an appeal against a determination
that a stand is a regulated stand. This period is calculated
from the date when any preliminary determination becomes a final
determination under section 28(3) of the Act (paragraph (l)(a))
or in the case of a final determination under section 28(6) the
date of the receipt of the notice of that determination
(paragraph (l)(b)).
9.   Other appeals under the 1987 Act must under paragraph (2 \ of
Regulation 5 be brought within 28 days in the case of a general
safety certificate and 7 days in the case of a special safety
certificate from the "relevant date". Paragraph (3 ) of
Regulation 5 sets down what is meant by the "relevant date".


10.  Regulation 6 deals with fees. Paragraph (1 ) of Regulation 6
enables local authorities to determine the fee to be charged in
respect of an application (whether or not successful) for the
issue, amendment, replacement or transfer of a safety certificate
or in respect of an application for the cancellation of such a
certificate for a stand which has ceased to be a regulated stand.
Paragraph (2 ) provides that any fee must not exceed an amount
commensurate with the work actually and reasonably done by or on
behalf of the local authority.




Home Office
Fire and Emergency Planning Department
G1 Division
HOC 96 /1988 ANNEX C



PART III OF THE FIRE SAFETY AND SAFETY OF PLACES OF SPORT ACT
1987 : ISSUE AND CONTENT OF SAFETY CERTIFICATES


Introduction

1.   This Annex provides some additional advice on the issue and
content of safety certificates which local authorities may care
to take into consideration when drawing up safety certificates
for regulated stands under Part III of the Fire Safety and Safety
of Places of Sport Act (the 1987 Act). Although directed at
certification under Part III, the underlying principles of the
advice in this Annex may also assist local authorities when
reviewing terms and conditions to be contained in safety
certificates for sports grounds designated under the Safety of
Sports Grounds Act 1975 (SSGA). Local authorities may find it
useful to cross-reference this Annex with Annex A to Home Office
Circular 71/1987 and Annexes C and D to Home Office Circular No
7/1986 - some of the advice of which is reproduced below.

2.   The following advice is given in good faith but it should be
remembered that only the courts can interpret on points of law.


Reasonable Safety

3.   Part III of the 1987 Act, like the SSGA, provides that terms
and conditions within safety certificates should be such as are
considered necessary or expedient to secure reasonable safety.
It would probably be unreasonable, even if it were practicable,
to seek the absolute safety of everyone occupying a stand at a
sports ground. The courts might also be sympathetic to an appeal
against a term or condition which entailed expenditure on
measures to combat a risk which was seen to be remote or did not
arise at all at the particular ground or stand. Local
authorities should therefore consider operating on the principle
that the addition to safety which any particular measure will
produce needs to be balanced against its cost. In some cases
certain measures may have to be taken whatever the cost,
irrespective of the size or profitability of the undertaking.
But where the difficulty and cost of the remedy are high, and
careful assessment shows the risk is not significant, it may not
be necessary to insist on action;  if the risk is significant it
may be possible to opt for a solution which will reduce it to an
acceptable level at modest cost.


General

4.   An application for a general safety certificate under Part
III should normally be accompanied by information about the
stand, a proper plan of the stand and its installations.  In
practice, not all the information necessary to draw up a safety
certificate will always be provided at the time of the initial
application. However, local authorities are able to require, by
notice, under section 28(11) further details to enable them to
consider the application.  For an application for a special
safety certificate under Part III much information would already
be available from the general safety certificate application;
but additional information may be required if, for example, the
activities which are to take place at the sports ground for which
a special safety certificate is needed are such that the
spectator accommodation in the stand is altered or affected.

5.   A special safety certificate under Part III is issued at the
discretion of the local authority (subject to a right of appeal).
There is no time limit in which a safety certificate, whether
general or special, has to be issued. However, a special safety
certificate will need to be issued before the event, allowing
time for any appeal.  Local authorities may therefore wish to
give ground management advice on the likely time scale which will
be needed and to remind them that a last minute application might
constitute sufficient grounds for refusal.  In general an
application lodged 3 months before an event should give
sufficient time for the procedures (including an appeal) to be
carried out. Local authorities may nonetheless feel able to
agree to a shorter period where they are satisfied that the
application can be finalised within the lesser period of time
given.


Consultation

6.   It is envisaged that consultation between the local
authority and ground management will take place in drawing up the
terms and conditions to be contained within any safety
certificate issued under Part III. In this way much valuable
information can be obtained in order to apply the principles of
the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds (the Green Guide) so as to
meet the safety needs of the particular stand(s) at the ground in
question (see also paras 9-15 below). Local authorities will be
aware of the statutory requirement to consult the police and, in
London and metropolitan counties, the fire authority, elsewhere,
the building authority, and are reminded of the potential
advantages of a safety team approach as a way of ensuring that
the professional knowledge and skills of the various disciplines
can be brought to bear on drawing up a safety certificate.


Scope and content of safety certificates

7.   Provision is made in section 27(6) for different terms and
conditions to be included in a general safety certificate for a
stand for different activities at the ground. Where a ground is
used for several activities local authorities may therefore wish
to include, as far as possible, all the activities within the
general safety certificate, reserving the need to issue a special
safety certificate for a "one off" event when the viewing
arrangements are likely to be affected in such a way as to
require additional considerations and safeguards which cannot be
included in the general safety certificate.  Section 27 does not
have to vary to meet different needs, but as a general rule local
authorities may wish to consider inclusion of terms and
conditions which address

     a.   structural stability where elements of the stand are
     judged, from preliminary inspections, as likely to be
     inadequate for their intended function.

     b.   the maximum number of spectators who should be admitted
     to the stand(s) and different parts of it (them) bearing in
     mind the considerations set out in paragraphs 10 - 13 below;

     c.   the number, size and situation of entrances to and
     exits from the stand(s) or any part of it (them) including
     means of escape in case of fire or other emergency; and the
     means of access to any such entrances and exits;

     d.   requirements for entrances and exits and means of
     access to be properly maintained and kept free of
     obstruction;

     e.   other fire precaution measures;

     f.   the provision for crush barriers, if any, their number,
     strength and location;

     g.   provision for stewards, steward training, fire drill
     procedures, first aid.

    h.   need for records of maintenance, inspections and/or
    tests and training.

8.   If it is evident that a stand is rarely filled to capacity
the local authority may consider it proper to base the safety
requirements on the actual levels of attendance.  In such
circumstances the terms and conditions of the general safety
certificate may not be sufficient for a particularly attractive
event or fixture when a larger than normal crowd can be expected
to attend. As some such fixtures could arise at relatively short
notice, local authorities may wish to work out in advance, the
modifications and/or additional controls to the normal terms and
conditions of the general safety certificate which would enable
an increase in the number of spectators to be accommodated; for
example, an increase in the limit might be conditional upon the
employment of additional stewards, or more sophisticated fire
fighting equipment with trained stewards to operate it.

9.   When drawing up terms and conditions in any safety
certificate local authorities will doubtless keep in mind the
advice of the Green Guide (see paragraphs 10 and 11 below) and
the "reasonableness" of the requirements (see paragraph 3 above).
The quality or standard of measures should be stated so that the
holder knows what is required under what conditions, and does not
have to rely on carrying out work "to the satisfaction of" or "as
may be required by" the authority. Terms and conditions
specifying work needed should include details of the increase in
the permitted spectator limit or, if there is no increase, the
restrictions on the capacity or operation if the work is not
done. The following are two examples of the sort of detail that
might, with adaptation to suit individual circumstances, be
included in a term or condition.


Example A.  (Where it is a condition that attendance records are
kept to a standard required by the authority).

"[Except as mentioned below] the holder shall keep a record [in
the form contained in Appendix   of this certificate] for [each]
[the] regulated stand to which this certificate applies of the
number of spectators admitted on each occasion when the stand[s]
is [are] used for the purpose of viewing the [specified]
activities at the ground [specified below] ...".

If a record is not required for low attendances an additional
clause might be added

"The number of spectators admitted on any occasion need not be
entered in the record described in paragraph   above where on any
occasion the total admission to the ground is certified by the
holder [in the record] as not having exceeded "x" by entering the
words [quote] which should be signed and dated by [the holder]."


Example B (where emergency lighting is the requirement)

"Emergency lighting for use in the event of failure of the
general lighting shall be provided on [exit] route(s) marked [
] on plan [   ] and shall include illuminated exit signs at exits
marked [   ] on plan [   ].

Emergency lighting provided under paragraph    above shall be
installed in accordance with paragraphs 166 to 169 of the Guide
to Safety at Sports Ground [except that .... ].

On completion of the installation a certificate of completion [in
the form specified in Appendix [ ] of this certificate] shall be
obtained from a [specify] and that certificate shall [be retained
by the holder] [sent within [x days] to the authority].

Until installation as required in paragraph    above is carried
out and a certificate obtained as in paragraph    above [exit
route/s marked [   ] on plan [   ] is/are not to be used by
spectators] [the number of spectators who are to be admitted to
the stand is restricted to [   ]] [and areas marked [    ] on plan
[   ] are not to be occupied].

On completion of installation and on obtaining a certificate of
satisfaction required in paragraphs [   ] above exit routes
marked [   ] on plan [   ] may be used and the number of
spectators who may be admitted to the stand is increased to [   ]
[and the area(s) marked [   ] on plan [   ] may be used by
spectators.]11
Application of the Green Guide
10.    The Guide is not a statutory code providing a set of rigid
requirements to be applied in all cases irrespective of the
individual circumstances. The diversity of regulated stands is
likely to be considerable, varying from basic, covered terracing
at, say, non-league football or rugby grounds to large, complex
buildings offering a variety of facilities to many thousands of
spectators. The advice in the Guide has therefore to be applied
to the situation that is seen to exist at a particular ground
having taken account of such factors as location, size,
construction, condition, together with the activities undertaken
at the ground, the numbers and density of spectators who occupy
the stand or stands and their movement patterns. The following
examples may help to illustrate how the Guide might be
interpreted without jeopardising reasonable safety.

     i.   Where it is known that the safe limit of the stand will
     not be exceeded (eg because total attendances are within
     that limit) there may be no necessity to regulate the
     admission or, in the case of standing accommodation, to
     require internal division in order to control the dispersal
     of spectators.  In such circumstances, the number, strength
     and layout of barriers (if any) for standing areas need only
     reflect the number and density of the spectators to be
     accommodated.

     ii. A partly roofed, open sided, terrace allowing quick
     movement away from the covered area may not need fire-
     warning/detection systems.

     iii. The strength requirements for protective guard-rails on
     stairs, gangways or exit routes and balustrading in front of
     a row of seats may well vary. The last of these is not, for
     example, usually subjected to high pressures.  Similarly,
     side or end rails to seating rows will need to be designed
     to accommodate the forces to which they may be subjected.
     These may also vary and account should be taken of
     individual circumstances.

     iv. Where it is known that spectators vacate an area of a
     stand more quickly than envisaged by using the Guide's
     (notional) calculations, that knowledge may be taken into
     account when assessing requirements for safe egress from a
     stand.


Horseracing/greyhound racing

11.   Unlike crowds at some other sports where spectators are
essentially static for the duration of the event, there is a
common requirement for greyhound and horseracing spectators to be
mobile, with free movement to various internal parts of the stand
or racecourse to which they are admitted.   Local authorities may
find that this mobility requirement regulates the density at
which the spectators congregate on terraced areas to below the
maximum of 54 persons per 10 square metres (paragraph 222 of the
Guide) for "static spectator sports". Even at well attended
meetings, where crowd densities are liable to be high (perhaps
approaching the maximum of 54 per 10 square metres) "surging" is
not generally experienced.  Spectators will probably be static
for only a few minutes before moving off to other parts of the
stand or ground. This aspect of spectator behaviour should be
taken into account when considering the safety requirements of
the stand. For example, where barriers are judged to be
necessary at all, their function is most likely to be to channel
or direct safely the movement of spectators on the terrace, and
to mitigate against any "waterfall" effect of someone stumbling
at a critical moment, whilst simultaneously allowing the free
movement desired by spectators in between races.  In such
circumstances, continuous barriers (see paragraph 113 of the
Guide) will probably not be the most suitable arrangement, and a
series of staggered short lengths may be appropriate; the
horizontal spacing between barriers should be commensurate with
the forces likely to be generated on the terraced areas.

12. In the case of horseracing, access and egress can often be
gained to and from a stand from the front where it discharges on
to an open "enclosure" area. Except for those parts of the stand
to which entry is gained by additional payment, eg reserved
seating or boxes spectator movement within this enclosure area
(including the stand) is not controlled. As a general rule
therefore it will not be appropriate, or possible, to include
terms and conditions in a safety certificate specifying the
maximum total number of spectators to be admitted to the stand or
requiring records of the total number of spectators so admitted.
This ought not to create undue difficulty especially when the
crowd density on standing areas of the stand is low and such
areas are occupied for relatively short periods of time.  It
follows however that in setting terms and conditions geared to
the normal use of the stand the local authority will have to take
account of the possibility that everyone admitted to the
enclosure area may use the stand, - although at any given time
only a proportion of spectators will do so and even then will be
dispersed within it. These considerations may also apply to some
stands at greyhound racing courses.

13. Discussions with local management together with observation
and information about the numbers admitted to the particular
racecourse enclosure or stand at a greyhound racing stadium
should help to form a considered view on the level of use and
dispersal of spectators on which to base the terms and conditions
of the safety certificate. Where a racecourse or greyhound
stadium is occasionally used for a particularly attractive event
the local authority may wish to build into the safety certificate
additional terms and conditions to deal with that occasion as in
paragraph 8 above provided that they are satisfied that such
measures are sufficient to effect reasonable safety for the
number of spectators who are expected to attend.




Home Office
Fire & Emergency Planning Department
G1 Division
HOC 96/1988   ANNEX D



FIRE SAFETY AND SAFETY OF PLACES OF SPORT ACT 1987


NOTICE OF A PRELIMINARY DETERMINATION UNDER SECTION 28(2) THAT A
STAND IS A REGULATED STAND


To




Name (if any) and address of sports ground




Notice is hereby given to                        (who appears to
the                         Council to be the person responsible
for the management of the above-mentioned sports-ground and who
is therefore qualified under section 28(1) of the Fire Safety and
Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987 (the 1987 Act) to hold a
general safety certificate for the regulated stand[s]* at that
sports ground) that the council have made a preliminary
determination under section 28(2) of the 1987 Act that the
stand[s] detailed in the schedule to this notice [is]* [are]*
[a]* regulated stand[s]* under section 26(5) of the Act.     A
regulated stand under section 26(5) is a stand which provides
covered accommodation for 500 or more spectators to view
activities at the sports ground.


The preliminary determination of the council will become a final
determination two months from the date of this notice.     If you
consider that [the stand]* [any of the stands]* detailed in the
schedule to this notice [is]* [are]* not [a]* regulated
stand[s]*, or if you consider you are not qualified to hold a
general safety certificate you should contact the
Council at
without delay with your reasons.
SCHEDULE TO NOTICE



1.   Number of stands to which the notice applies




2.   Name (if any) of each stand:




3.   Location of each stand:




4.   Any other identifiable feature of each stand
