                              hcc   Mr Walters
                                    Mr Yates
                                    Mr Chilcot       H   ome   O   ffice
                                    HMCIC           QUEEN ANNEâ€™S GATE
                                    Mr Boys Smith
                                                    LONDON SWIH9AT
                                    Mr Malone-La6
                                    Mr Acltflson'
34 7 A / L F / M T                  Mr Sandiford
                                    Mr Nagler
                                    Mr Whalley

                                                                   May 1989




            I*-

Thank you for your letter of 9 May to the Home Secretary enclosing
one from the Clerk to the West Midlands Police Authority about the
costs of the inquiries by the West Midlands Police into the
Hillsborough Stadium Tragedy.

The Home Secretary has already accepted, in his reply of 28 April
to a Parliamentary Question from Mr Beaumont-Dark and in his
letters to West Midlands MPs, that the additional costs of the
police inquiries which are being undertaken in relation to the
disaster by West Midlands police officers should not fall on the
West Midlands Police Authority.

"Additional costs" include the cost of overtime worked by the West
Midlands police officers in their own force area to cover duties
which would otherwise have been undertaken by officers seconded to
the Hillsborough inquiry.

The Home Secretary also mentioned that it will take a while to sort
out the precise mechanics of how the West Midlands police should be
reimbursed.

As a first step in this process, a meeting is to be held between
Home Office officials and officers of the South Yorkshire Police
Authority shortly in order to discuss the representions which have
been made by that authority over the costs issue.

I have also agreed to meet a deputation from the West Midlands
Police Authority to discuss this matter.  I am anxious to reach
agreement on the reimbursement of West Midlands police costs and I
hope that we will be able to make progress following these meetings


                            OUfr Sot-

                                    I        t


                              FERRERS

J Rooker Esq MP
