                                                                                                    ^—J VaJ r\
                                From-. The   P   r iv a t e   S   ecretary
                                                                                                    Otfl-



                ec Wits* t'iCt-Wol&CA.                                       ^ I      H   ome   O   f f ic e
                   WV. T vajTAGaj
                                                                             \V ^   Q l'E E N ANXE'S GATE
                   flfW • G>©\Vo A.
                                                                                          DON SWIH 9 AT
                    (ftr- G o d ( W A
                   IV   r f \O M « r -
                                                                                     13 October 1989
                    Itlr • (VVovAJLd.-
                    IWr *V_» Axa^Vo^-




        The Home Secretary has asked me to thank you for your letter of 20
September and to say how very sorry he was to learn that you lost your son at
Hillsborough.


        All designated football grounds have to have a safety certificate and
to be inspected by the local authority every year.     Each certificate is a
detailed document containing terms and conditions needed to secure reasonable
safety for the number of spectators who are permitted to enter the different
parts of the ground to which it applies.     Each certificate is different.
Provided the circumstances of the ground remain unchanged, the certificate
remains relevant. Clubs are under an obligation to notify the local authority
of any proposal to make changes to the ground which may affect the safety of
spectators. It is quite possible, therefore, for a safety certificate to be
amended more often than once a year.

        You asked whether there were any plans to make Lord Justice Taylor's
recommendations law.   I should explain that the present recommendations are
interim recommendations.    Lord Justice Taylor is expected to complete his
report at about the end of the year and the Government will of course consider
whether any changes in the law are necessary in the light of his final
conclusions.


        In the meantime the Home Office has been monitoring, through the
police, the fire service and the local authorities responsible for safety
certificates, the extent to which those interim recommendations which Lord
Justice Taylor regarded as urgent have been complied with.  The information
which we have indicates that in the great majority of cases those
recommendations have already been implemented.   We are exploring with the
local authorities concerned any cases of difficulty and it seems unlikely
that, at least in the short term, any change in the law will be necessary.



        The Home Secretary has noted your views on the position of senior
officers of the South Yorkshire Police.   As you know, a number of matters
arising from the Hillsborough tragedy are still under investigation.   The
Chief Constable offered his resignation but the South Yorkshire Police
                                     2   .


Authority declined to accept it.   This was entirely a matter for the South
Yorkshire Police Authority.




                                         i C\ A ( J f Jttv j




                                             MS S J DENT




Mrs Janet Spearitt
