                                                [WfhA^

NOTE OF A MEETING WITH LUTON TOWN FOOTBALL CLUB HELD AT 10.30am
ON THURSDAY 16 NOVEMBER 1989


Present:   Lord Justice Taylor    Mr Brian Cole, Chairman, Luton
           Professor L Maunder     Town FC
           Mr Whalley             Mr B Tomlins, General Manager
           Mr Sweet               Miss C Newbury, Ticket
                                   Supervisor
                                  Insp G Lovell, Liaison Officer
                                   Bedfordshire Police
                                  Mr G Spalding, Acting
                                   Assistant Chief Constable,
                                   Bedfordshire Police


Luton Town Membership Scheme

1.   Lord Justice Taylor sought clarification on the scope and
requirements of the scheme currently operating at the club. In
essence, it involves a ban on all away supporters and a
requirement that home supporters belong to the membership scheme.
To apply for membership, fans should normally reside within a 25
mile radius of Luton; those living further away must justify why
they wish to join. On receipt of the written application, a
membership card is issued and posted to the applicant's address
to help ensure the authenticity of the application. Members can
apply to bring up to three guests with them to a game.

2.   There are five categories of card, depending on the
supporter's age, and each card has a bar-coding. The card is
either swiped through a reader by the card-holder as he enters
the ground (at the Kenilworth Road end) or produced for
inspection when purchasing a ticket in advance. There are double
turnstiles at the Kenilworth Road end, the outer turnstiles where
"swiping" takes place, and inner turnstiles where payment is
made. If an individual seeks entry using a banned card, a red
light shows and the outer turnstile will not open. Stewards
placed on the apron between the outer/inner turnstiles will then
escort the individual to an office outside the outer turnstiles
where he can be processed. The outer turnstiles are generally
unmanned, and the club acknowledged that requiring a turnstile
operator, rather than the supporter, to 'swipe' the card would
result in a considerable slowing of entry.
3.   The equipment had originally been supplied by Aquix, but had
proved unsatisfactory.  Initially, other forms of card, such as
Barclaycard, were found to operate the machine, equipment failed
because of condensation, and each reader took considerable time
to work through the entire membership list stored on the Central
Computer before isolating the particular membership record
required.

4.   The club had therefore employed a new company, S B
Electronics of Harpenden, and new equipment for the last season
and a half. The reader now checked each card only against the
banned list, currently standing at six cards. Both the club and
the police confirmed the success of the scheme, and initial
police wariness about having cards without photos had proved
unwarranted. The scheme was clearly not foolproof, but if
individuals obtained entry on a borrowed card and caused no
trouble, that was not regarded as a problem. Guest tickets had
to be pre-purchased (although that could be done up until kick-
off) and were themselves bar-coded. Guests had, at all times, to
be escorted by a member, and attempts to enter without a ticket
were generally thwarted by the vigilance of both police and
stewards.

5.   The general experience was that Luton's own known troubleÂ­
makers had not joined the scheme, but nor had they switched
allegiance elsewhere. Although entitled to do so, they did not,
generally, travel to away matches, and the whole town was a safer
place. The local shopping centre now had no hesitation about
remaining open during games, and had seen its trade on Saturdays
rise by 40% since the ban on away supporters. There was a
general consensus that the ban had itself removed the focus for
aggression among Luton supporters - atmosphere and behaviour
generally were much improved and, as a result, the number of
police needed was far fewer.   In the police view, the essential
feature of Luton's success had been the ban on away supporters,
not the membership scheme itself.


6.   Whilst there had been an initial fall in attendance
following introduction of the scheme, membership now stood at
21000 and average attendances were rising. In addition the club
was attracting more families, women and older people, although it
recognised it had lost a number of casual supporters.


FA Cu p /f l Cu p

7.   Different attitudes had been shown to the issue of away fans
by those administering Cup competitions. The FA had initially
allowed games to go ahead without such fans, whereas the FL had
banned the club for not allowing away supporters. As a result,
Luton had agreed the following year to allocate 25% of tickets to
away fans so as to enable participation in the League Cup
competition. Consequently, the FA had also subsequently required
them to admit away supporters for Cup games, though on a more
flexible match-by-match basis. The position was, however,
unsatisfactory.


All-Seater Stadia

8.   Whilst recognising the benefits of all-seater stadia, the
club felt that, particularly at existing stadia, there might
still be a place for standing. All-seating required suitable
cover which in practice would probably mean a new green-field
stadium. Here, as Luton themselves had discovered, there were
likely to be planning difficulties.
