N Pearce CA-IU/RG1            From: Miss P Nicholls HC(A)4D

                              Date: 15 November 1994


CORRESPONDENCE FROM DAVID ALTON MP REGARDING ANDREW DEVINE


1. Please see the attached correspondence from David Alton MP
about a Hillsborough disaster victim now in PVS.

2. The matters raised in the correspondence are not so much
about our policy on PVS but on services available and
difficulties over the administration of the disaster fund.

3. No one remembers the case being raised at the meeting or
of a file being handed over previously.

4. For information I enclose a copy of the letter sent to Ann
Winterton and David Alton following the meeting.  It sets out
where we are with our policy on euthanasia etc.

5. I have notified Pr/off that papers have been transferred to
you.




                                        MISS P NICHOLLS
                                        HC (A) 4D
                                        124 WEL
                                        Ext 24379/Fax 24402
Kypros Menicou                          From: N Pearce
DC/SoS
                                        Date: 18 November 1994

                                        Copy (minute only):
                                        Mr Smith HC(A)4D
                                        Miss Nicholls HC(A)4D
                                        Mrs Enderby PR/OFF



CORRESPONDENCE FROM DAVID ALTON MP
THE CASE OF HILLSBOROUGH VICTIM ANDREW DEVINE


Miss Nicholls HC(A)4D passed this case to me on 15 November.

It would seem that the point at issue is the administration
and use of the Hillsborough disaster appeal fund. In




I suggest that the papers are forwarded to the Home office,
which is responsible for charities.

A reply to David Alton for Private Secretary's signature is
attached.

       •
       Go follow.




N Pearce
                                     £cii!f2
Room 5E39 ext 45616
David Alton Esq MP


Thank you for your letter of 14 October to Virginia Bottomley
enclosing one from solicitors E Rex Makin & Co. of
Whitechapel, Liverpool LI 1HQ about the case of Hillsborough
victim Andrew Devine. I have been asked to reply.

I am sorry for the delay in getting back to you, but as you
know we did not originally have the full set of papers on the
case.

Having considered the full submission, it appears that the
point at issue which E Rex Makin & Co. is pursuing on behalf
of the Devine family is the administration and use of the
Hillsborough Disaster Appeal Fund. This is properly a matter
for the Home Office, not the Department of Health, and I am
forwarding the correspondence to them.

I hope this is helpful.




PRIVATE SECRETARY
