Convention                                                 Rosebery House
                                                           9 Haymarket Terrace
Scottish Local Authorities                                 Edinburgh EH12 5XZ
                                                           Telephone 031-346 1222
                                                           Fax 031-346 0055
                                                           Roy Maclver
                                                           Secretary General

                                                           Your Ref:
  Mr R M Whalley
  Secretary                                                Our Ref:    P/12/2-RMcC/IS
  Inquiry into the Hillsborough
    Stadium Disaster                                       Date:       29 May 1989
  50 Queen Anne's Gate
  LONDON
  SW1H 9AT




   Dear Mr Whalley

  HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY

  I thank you for your letter of 23 May intimating the terms of
  reference of Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry and inviting the
  Convention to make a written submission for the second stage of
  the Inquiry.

  The Convention made a submission to the Popplewell Inquiry in 1985
  and I anticipate that it will wish to respond to your invitation.

  I am arranging to obtain observations from the Chief Executives of
  those regional councils in Scotland which have relevant sports
  grounds and have noted to forward the Convention's submission to
  you by 12 June.

  Yours sincerely


  Secretary General




IF TELEPHONING OR CALLING PLEASE ASK FOR:   Raymund McClUSkey
  10L0044G
Convention of                                                                       Rosebery House
                                                                                    9 Haymarket Terrace
Scottish Local Authorities                                                          Edinburgh EH12 5XZ
                                                                                    Telephone 031-346 1222
                                                                                    Fax 031-346 0055
                                                                                    Roy Maclver
                                                                                    Secretary General



  R M Whalley Esq
                                                                           (VcO-o   Your Ref:
                                                                                    Your Ref:

  Secretary                                                         P4 .            Our Ref: P/1 2/2-DMH/lS
  Inquiry into the Hillsborough
    Stadium Disaster                                                                Date:       13 July 1989
  50 Queen Anne's Gate
  LONDON
  SW1H 9AT




  Dear Mr Whalley

  HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY

  I refer to my letter of 29 May 1989 and now enclose the
  Convention's written submission to Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry
  into the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster.

  I regret that it was not possible to make a submission earlier.

 Yours sincerely




  Secretary General




if t e l e p h o n in g   or   c a l l in g   please ask   fo r:   Raymund McCluskey/Mrs Henwood
  07L0001G
           CONVENTION OF SCOTTISH LOCAL AUTHORITIES


                     Written Submission to
              Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry into
               the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster



Without having access to all the facts of the case the Convention
has some hesitation in expressing firm views on what should be
done to prevent a similar tragedy from occurring in the future.
The following observations and suggestions are submitted on the
basis of media reports of the Hillsborough disaster and
experience at stadia in Scotland.




Perimeter Fencing:   All-Seated Stadia

The reasons for the introduction of perimeter fencing are well
understood, but it is widely thought that all-seated stadia would
do away with the need for such fencing. That is not to say that
the provision of seating for all spectators is a panacea on its
own.  It should be regarded as one element of a package of safety
measures.

The advantages of an all-seated stadium are as follows:

(a)   a capacity figure can be accurately determined and adhered
      to;

(b)   supervision and control of spectators by stewards and other
      officials is facilitated and a potential source of trouble
      can be more easily and more quickly spotted;

(c)   the provision of seats for everybody induces greater self-
      discipline and virtually eliminates crowd surging and
      crushing; and

(d)   it helps to ensure the orderly arrival and departure of
      spectators and better control of emergency evacuation
      procedures.

The introduction of all-seated facilities everywhere will
obviously take time and substantial resources.  In the meantime,
where circumstances are favourable, consideration should be given
to dismantling perimeter fencing.  In cases where it is judged
still to be necessary, an adequate number of access points should
be provided through the fencing for movement in either direction
in the event of an incident. These points should be made easily
identifiable by the use of a different colour. No advertisement
hoardings should be placed in front of the access points.  It is
understood that at certain stadia on the European continent the
whole of the fencing consists of a series of gates. This may be
a better arrangement from the safety point of view.


07R0002G
                              2


The crucial issue of resources cannot be ignored.  It will serve
no real purpose to point to the need for all-seated stadia
without at the same time making appropriate proposals as to how
the resources needed, running to tens of millions of pounds, are
to be obtained.


Control Facilities

Experience indicates that the control room must be -

(1) sufficiently spacious to accommodate not only police
     officers but also representatives of other emergency
     services (first-aid, ambulance service, fire service)
     co-ordinating the measures required in an emergency; and

(2) sited in such a way as to give a clear view of all parts of
     the stadium.

These requirements should be included in the conditions for the
grant of a Safety Certificate or at least strongly recommended in
the guidance issued to certificate holders.

Communications to and from the control room must be of a high
standard and regularly tested.


Management and Stewarding

Responsibility for the management of facilities and their
operation on the occasion of a sporting event clearly lies with
the certificate holder, acting in conjunction with the police.
If an emergency situation within the stadium develops to the
point where police intervention is necessary, it is essential to
avoid any ambiguity as to who is in control. Consideration
should be given to specifying in statutory form the duties of
certificate holders in respect of crowd safety and control and
the respective roles of the certificate holder and the police in
these matters.

In many cases the quality of stewarding requires improvement.
Comprehensive training exercises, including fire drill and
emergency evacuation procedures, should be mandatory. The
appropriate number of stewards should be the subject of
consultation between the certificate holder and the local
authority's safety team.

The certificate holder should seek professional advice on first-
aid requirements in terms of both personnelâ€˜and equipment.

There is a case for some flexibility in spectator capacity. The
determination of the appropriate capacity at a given event should
be governed by the nature of the event and the type of crowd
expected, taking into account police advice and any other
relevant indications. Maximum capacities should be specified in
the Safety Certificate, since reliable information on a given
event may not be available in time to go through the process of
an appeal.


07R0002G
                               3


Even when a safe and reasonable capacity has been determined,
there is a need to ensure even density within each terracing area
and the maintenance of free passageways for emergency use. This
consideration must influence the number of stewards employed.

The efficacy of present guidance on turnstile entry must be
questioned. The "rate per hour" criterion is of decreasing value
when one examines the characteristics of spectator flows for
events where capacity or near-capacity crowds attend. Pre-match
entertainment has, on the whole, proved an inadequate incentive
to spectators to be in place within the stadium well before kick-
off time. All-ticket entry (ensuring guaranteed admission) and
the prohibition of alcohol within the stadium often lead to
spectators postponing their arrival until 15 minutes or less
before the commencement of the match.  In such circumstances
turnstile capacities become inadequate for ensuring that two-
thirds (or thereabouts) of the crowd can be comfortably handled
within the final 15 minutes.  Rates per minute criteria might
well prove more acceptable where there is regularly a late influx
of spectators, but this could of course require a greater number
of turnstiles to be provided.


Tickets

The sale, distribution and checking of tickets should receive
attention. Specifically -

(1)   the sale of tickets on match days should be discouraged;

(2)   ticket printing and distribution should not exceed stadium
      capacity;

(3)   a system for tracing purchases of tickets should be
      operated;

(4)   a record of ticket printing, sales and distribution should
      be maintained and should be open to inspection by the local
      authority's safety team; and

(5)   if circumstances appear to make it desirable, there should
      be a police check at some distance from the stadium on
      persons making their way to it in order to ensure that only
      ticket holders approach the turnstiles.


Safety Certificates:   Safety Teams

There is a case for requiring Safety Certificates to be renewed
annually. This would help to persuade football clubs to carry
put improvements with due speed. The current system means that
local authorities, the police and others are burdened with the
responsibility of constantly exerting pressure on dilatory clubs
to complete the required works and thus comply with the terms of
the Safety Certificate.  Prohibition notices of course provide a
remedy where a major violation occurs, but in many areas the Fire
Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987 refers to
"reasonableness" as a criterion, which can be a rather subjective
yardstick. A better solution even than annual certification

07R0002G
                              4


might be to allow each local authority to decide at the outset on
the period of validity of a certificate in the light of the
circumstances at the ground and the local authority's experience
of the management of the facility.

Other references to Safety Certificates will be found under
earlier sections of this submission headed "Control Facilities"
and "Management and Stewarding".

Local authorities should be given greater statutory powers to
enter and inspect stadia, to require the carrying out of
urgent repairs and to revoke certificates.  It should be
mandatory to notify the certifying authority of structural
alterations to a regulated stadium or its precincts.


Improvement Grants

Currently league football clubs wishing to receive grants for
safety works and improvements have to apply to the relevant
Trusts on an annual basis. However, because of their scale some
works have to be programmed over two or even three close seasons.
Clubs carrying out major projects therefore need long-term
commitments from the financing bodies, since short-term
allocations of money can lead to short-term solutions.




July 1989



07R0002G
