                                                                     <D




          FIN/89 180/117/1                          26 April 1989


BY HAND

J E Mortimer Esq
HE1 Division
H.M. Treasury
Treasury Chambers
Parliament Street
London SW1P 3AG




HILLSBOROUGH ENQUIRY:   COSTS

I am writing to seek your urgent agreement to arrangements
concerning the costs of Lord Justice Taylor's enquiry into the
Hillsborough disaster, including in particular the costs incurred
by those giving evidence to the enquiry during its public hearing
phase, due to begin in Sheffield on 28 April.

The proposal, which I understand is acceptable to the Treasury
Solicitor's office, is that the precedent of the Popplewell
Enquiry in 1985 into safety at sports ground should be followed.
At the opening hearing on 28 April, Lord Justice Taylor would
explain that there are no statutory provisions governing the
enquiry, but that the Secretary of State is able to meet the
costs incurred by any person for the purposes of the enquiry.
Lord Justice Taylor would then go on to explain that the
Secretary of State will look to him to assess costs and to make
recommendations to the Secretary of State.   He would explain
that he proposed at the end of the enquiry to consider what
recommendations to make and that he will prepared to make
recommendations on a common fund basis, that is a reasonable
amount in respect of all costs.

I understand that Lord Justice Taylor will consider on Friday
which witnesses ought to be represented, and how such witnesses
should be grouped for the purposes of representation.    He will
explain that he intends to make a recommendation in respect of
the reasonable costs of any party, except where he considers that
the person representing the party concerned has wasted the time
of the enquiry.    He would add that he would expect and hope to
be able to give a warning if and when he considered that that
point Weis about to be reached, and would not make an adverse
recommendation without giving the party concerned an opportunity
to make representations to him.    As you may know, a statement of
that kind was made at the opening of the Popplewell Enquiry,
which itself was adapted from the precedent of the Scarman
Enquiry.

The costs of representation of witnesses, and the costs of the
administration of the enquiry itself (that is, of Lord Justice
Taylor and his secretariat) would I think fall on Class IX,
Vote 3.    I understand that the Treasury Solicitor's Department
has agreed that, as with the Popplewell Enquiry, that Department
will bear its own costs and the costs of Counsel for the enquiry
and witnesses' expenses.    Even so, the costs to be borne on the
Home Office Vote may be expected to run to hundreds of thousands
of pounds.    In the nature of things, a precise estimate is not
yet available.    The latest assessment I have is that the
administrative costs may amount to as much as £712,000 in 1989-90
and £103,000 in 1990-91; and that expenditure on legal
representation may amount to as much as £500,000 in 1989-90.

I am prepared to say now that the Home Office will do all it can
to cover the full costs of the enquiry falling on the Home Office
from the estimate provision in Class IX, Vote 3.    As you will
know, however, that Vote is already under severe pressure,
especially as regards running costs provision, and I do not know
how much, if anything, it will be feasible to find.

On the technicalities, I take it that we should seek a token
Supplementary Estimate to create a new subhead and transfer
provision into it.

I should be grateful if you would let me know tomorrow, 27 April,
whether you are content that Lord Justice Taylor should make an
announcement on Friday morning, 28 April, on the lines set out
above; whether you agree that the costs should fall on Class IX,
Vote 3 and on the Treasury Solicitor's vote on the basis
described above; and whether you are content that this should be
done on the basis that the Home Office will do all it can to
cover the costs of the enquiry from existing Vote provision,
recognising that the pressures on the Vote are such that an
undertaking now to find the full costs of the enquiry from
existing provision would not be realistic.




                               G K SANDIFORD
                            Finance Division 1



ct   Mr    ffursaw (Treasury Solicitor)
     Mir   jjteubner (LCD)
     Mr    |§ammond
     Mr    ftalone-Lee
     Mr    Turney
     Mr    Whalley
     Mr    Archer (Gl)
