                          IV kyhk
                                                cc Mr Nagler
                                                   Mr Whalley
                                                   Mr F Smith (o/r)




Mr Townsend




METROPOLITAN POLICE CHARGES FOR POLICING FOOTBALL MATCHES


Thank you for sending to Mr Norbury (who no longer deals with
this subject) your note of 14 July covering a draft submission to
Ministers seeking approval for increased Metropolitan Police
charges for policing inside football grounds.


2.   I have two points of substance to make and one very small
drafting suggestion.


3.   The first point of substance is that the draft submission is
silent on the existence of the Football Spectators Bill.    I think
no long account or explanation is required - Ministers are well
aware of this Bill - and that all that is required is an addition
at the end of the opening paragraph of the draft submission of:-


     "and the probable enactment of the Football Spectators
     Bill."


4.   My second point is that while the draft submission, rightly
I think, argues that increasing the charges to football clubs
substantially will give them an added incentive to improve the
behaviour of their fans, this incentive would be more credible to
clubs and presentationally welcome to Ministers if the clubs
could be assured that the charges would be promptly and flexibly
adjusted downwards where fans' good behaviour merited a reduction
in police presence inside grounds.   As the draft submission
stands at present the stick is very clear but the arrangements
for the carrot are not.
5.   My drafting suggestion is that we should prefer "policing
inside football grounds" to "policing the insides of football
grounds."


                          j. L. GODDARD

                          J L GODDARD
                           19 July 1989


F8 Division
