                                     0                      5 OCT 1983 I


7-10.JS

From        J L Goddard                          cc: Mr   Storr
            F8 Division                              Mr   Boys Smith
            Ext. 3314                                Mr   Hammond
                                                     Mr   Bolton
            4 October 1989                           Mr   Clayton
                                                     Mr   Osborne (o/r)
                                                     Mr   Pugh
                                                     Mr   F Smith
                                                     Mr   Lidington


Ms Rex
Miss Snow




FOOTBALL SPECTATORS BILL:    COMMITTEE ISSUES

As requested in Ms Rex's minute of 28 September I attach a
draft letter Mr Lloyd might send to Mr Moynihan inviting his
agreement to an extension to the alcohol offences in Schedule
1 to the Bill which, where the court makes a declaration of
relevance, would trigger disqualification from the membership
scheme and might lead to the making of a restriction order.
The letter should be copied to Mr Atkins, Minister for roads
and traffic (in relation to the extension to drink/drive
offences).


2.   As also requested we will shortly provide a draft letter
that Mr Lloyd might send to those who served on the Bill
Committee, explaining Government amendments.




                                        j. l .


                                           J L GODDARD
FOOTBALL SPECTATORS BILL




While the Bill was in Committee in the Commons the Opposition
tabled amendment 105 proposing a very broad extension to the
alcohol offences at paragraph (f) of Schedule 1 (ie those
offences which are football related). You agreed to consider
the matter and I enclose a Hansard extract (column 521) giving
your response.


I agree that we should think carefully before proposing
extensions to the Schedule but on reflection I am convinced
that a carefully defined extension is justified in this
instance. As presently drafted paragraph (f) catches only
those alcohol offences defined in Section 1 of the Sporting
Events (Control of Alcohol etc) Act 1985. I see some force in
the Oppositionâ€™s view that in relation to drunkenness on
journeys to or from designated matches, Section 1 offences are
too narrowly defined for the purposes of the Bill: the
definition includes. for example, someone who is sober but who
possesses a single can of beer on a special train, coach or
minibus going to a match; but it excludes someone who is
drunk and maybe disorderly trying to make the same journey on
foot.


My proposition is that we should extend the offences in
paragraph (f) to include all drunkenness offences on the way
to or from a designated match. This would catch offences of
being drunk in a public place, disorderly behaviour while
drunk in a public place and driving when under the influence
of drink or with an alcohol concentration above the prescribed
limit. As Schedule 1 applies not only to Part II of the Bill
but also to Part I am writing to ask for your agreement to
amendments for this purpose being tabled.


In Committee you rightly cautioned that it would be necessary
to bear in mind the relevance of any conviction to football
before it was included in the Schedule, but I think this point
is satisfactorily dealt with by the requirement in paragraph
(f) which limits the offences caught to those as respects
which the court makes a declaration of relevance.


I am copying this letter to Robert Atkins at the Department of
Transport.
