                                            cc:   Ms   Adams
                                                  Mr   Chilcot
                                                  Mr   Moriarty
                                                  Mr   Boys Smith
                                                  Mr   Turney
                                                  Mr   Mower
                                                  Mr   Addison
                                                  Mr   Goddard
                                                  Mr   Le Vay
                                                  Mr   Nagler
                                                  Mr   Whalley
                                                  Mr   Lidington
                                                  Mr   Godfrey




From:         Antony Townsend
              F9 Division
              31 July 1989




Miss Bannister


CHARGES FOR POLICING FOOTBALL MATCHES IN LONDON


You asked for further advice on Mr Boys Smith's submission of 20
July, in the light of Mr Mower's note of 28 July and Mr
Moynihan's telephone call of today. I have discussed this note
with Mr Mower.

2.   I understand that Mr Moynihan was content to agree to the
proposed increases in charges, but suggested:

        (i)   that Lord Ferrers should write to London MPs announcing
              the decision;

    (ii)      that the increases should not be phased over two years,
              but introduced at one go. Mr Moynihan believes it
              better to get the fuss over with now, rather than
              delaying part of it till next year when the clubs will
              be smarting from the costs of improved safety and new
              identity procedures.

3.   You decided that the notion of a letter to MPs should be
abandoned. MPs are away from Parliament, and it seems unwise to
associate ourselves with the increase in charges any more than is
strictly necessary (though it is the Home Secretary's decision as
police authority)-.

4.   On the question of phasing the increases, I have spoken
again to the Metropolitan Police in the light of Mr Moynihan's
suggestion, and Mr Mower's opposing view that the second phase of
the increase (charging for travelling time) should be delayed
until 1991/92. When the Met's Policy Committee considered the
question, they were firmly of the view that the charge for
travelling time (which represents a major departure from previous
contracts) ought to be delayed to soften the blow. This view
will only have been strengthened by the recent police pay award
of 9.25%, and the London rent allowance increase of 57.5%, which
will together add 17% to the charges for policing football
irrespective of any changes to the contract.

5.   I recommend that Ministers do not at this stage approve the
charges for travelling time. This will leave it open to approve
them in time for next season (1990/91), if that seems sensible
nearer the time.

Timing and handling

6.   The Met had intended to notify the FA and League of the
proposed new contracts, and to issue the new contracts to each
club; but not to make a public announcement.   (The clubs are
already aware that a new contract is likely, since they have been
asked to approve two-month extensions of the existing contracts
pending decisions on a new contract).

7.   Mr Mower has suggested that, in order to get the news of the
new contracts out of the way in advance of the publication of the
interim Hillsborough report, it would be helpful if the Met could
make tell to the press as soon as possible, preferably on
Tuesday. This would also ensure that the press were first made
aware of the changes by means of a measured statement from the
Met, rather than the hysterical reactions of a football club.
(It will not be possible to issue the draft contracts
immediately, since divisional commanders will have to be briefed,
and letters and contracts assembled).                         #
Conclusion

8.     I recommend:

       (i)   that Ministers now approve the first phase of the
             increased charges, leaving a decision on the second
             phase until later;

      (ii)   that we ask the Met to set in hand the process of
             issuing the new contracts;

     (iii)   that Mr Mower be asked to approach the Met Press
             Office, asking them to make a fairly low-key
             announcement as soon as possible, along the lines of
             the attached draft.




                                               ANTONY TOWNSEND
DRAFT ANNOUNCEMENT TO THE PRESS (PERHAPS A WORD WITH THE EVENING
STANDARD RATHER THAN A FORMAL PRESS RELEASE)


The Metropolitan Police announced today that, following a review,
the charges they make upon clubs for policing football matches
are to be increased. The review established that many London
clubs were being significantly undercharged for the police
officers deployed inside grounds during, and immediately before
and after, matches.


The increases are designed to restore the principle that the
clubs, not ratepayers and taxpayers, should meet the cost. Even
with the new charges, clubs would not be meeting all the costs of
policing football matches:   some costs, including those of
tackling public disorder outside the grounds, would continue to
fall upon police funds.


A Metropolitan Police spokesman emphasised that the charges -
due to take effect later this year - would not compromise safety.
Senior officers would continue to decide how many officers were
required at each match.



[NB The Met would not discuss the actual increases for each club:
                 <â– 

they would state that the size of increase would vary from club
to club, and depend upon decisions about the level of policing at
each ground.]
2,I\S
