INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH              The Rt Hon Lord Justice Taylor
STADIUM DISASTER
                                           50 Queen Anneâ€™s Gate
                                           London SW1H 9AT
                                           01-273 2577/3602/2370


Campbell Ogilvie Esq                         Our Ref:
Secretary                                    FEP/89 35/48/107
Rangers FC
Ibrox Stadium
GLASGOW
G51 2XD                                    Date

                                             18 October 1989




VISIT BY LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR

I am writing at Lord Justice Taylor's request to thank you and
your colleagues for the warm welcome extended to us during our
visit on Saturday. Lord Justice Taylor greatly appreciated the
opportunity to discuss matters of interest and to experience at
first-hand your generous hospitality. May I add my own personal
thanks to you and Alistair for giving up so much of your time to
accompany us on the day and for answering our numerous questions.
I do appreciate the demands it must have imposed on you.

As you probably gathered, Lord Justice Taylor came away impressed
by the club's professionalism and vigour and by the obviously
close co-operation between it and the other bodies involved.
There are clear lessons to be drawn from the experience.

I noticed on our tour that there were a number of very impressive
aerial photographs of the stadium and its surroundings.  If there
is any chance of the Inquiry obtaining some copies, I should be
most grateful.  I also believe that you were going to expand in
writing on various points which Lord Justice Taylor raised during
the day, and if you would care to write to me at this address
(Room 448), I shall ensure that the information is passed on.

In the meantime, my thanks once again for such a successful and
enjoyable day - both on and off the pitch!  I am copying this
letter to Alan McPherson for his information.




                                       JONATHAN SWEET
                                       Hillsborough Inquiry
