                                                       H0ME0FFICEV1
#   fla m                                      Queen A nneâ€™s Gate London SW1H 9AT
                                                       Direct line: 01-273       ,
                                                     Switchboard: 01-273 t ) 0 a 3


    Our reference:    poL/89 850/4/30
    Your reference:   RCJ/US


                                                                ^ fa
       R C Johnston Isq BA IPFA                                        fu.^
       Clerk and Financial Officer to                                      '
        the South Yorkshire Police Authority
       PO Box 3?
       Regent street
       Barnsley-
       South Yorkshire
       S70 2PQ                                       9 August 1989 .




       HILLSBOROUGHl COSTS OF INVESTIGATION BY WEST MIDLANDS POLICE
       Thank you for your letter of 31 July asking to what extent the
       West Midlands Police are undertaking work other than for Lord
       Justice Taylor's enquiry and whether expenditure on such activities
       would be covered by the terms of Lord Ferrers' letter of 27 June*
       The investigation by the West Midlands police was requested by the
       Chief Constable of South Yorkshire to look into the planning and
       operational decisions of the South Yorkshire Police.       It was
       subsequently agreed to make the results of the investigation
       available to Lord Justice Taylor.
       We accept that some aspects of the investigation have, at the
       request of the Taylor Enquiry, dealt with 'areas not directly of
       interest to South Yorkshire police, such as design of sports
       grounds. The West Midlands Police Authority have not separately
       itemised these aspects. Nevertheless it is clear to us that much
       of the investigation must have concerned events on the day and the
       policing of them; matters which are inescapably the concern of the
       South Yorkshire police.
       I understand that the investigations by the West Midlands Police on
       behalf of Lord Justice Taylor are now virtually complete, other
       than follow up enquiries or particular aspects which may require
       some further work.
       The national interest in the Taylor Enquiry was taken into account
       when Lord Ferrers wrote to Sir John Layden on 27 June making the
       offer, on behalf of the Government, of a special payment which
would effectively meet nearly 80% of the anticipated costs of the
investigation from central funds.

Turning to the specific questions in the your letter the purposes
served by the West Midlands police inquiries clearly include the
preparation of evidence to the Coroner's inquest and their
inquiries may also be relevant in future to complaints or
discipline proceedings or conceivably to cases, if any, taken to
the criminal or civil courts.     It is obviously not possible to
apportion costs precisely to each of these purposes.        I can,
however, confirm that the special payment will cover all aspects of
the investigation which has been undertaken by West Midlands
Police, both those aspects related to the Taylor enquiry and those
related to other matters of concern to South Yorkshire, such as
evidence to the Coroner's inquest (in some cases the same material
may serve more than one purpose).                v

Any work which is being or may be undertaken by other forces in
relation to disciplinary investigations would not qualify for the
special payment. However, if any of the work already undertaken by
the West Midlands as part of its recent investigation proves
relevant to any disciplinary or complaints investigation we are
prepared to let it count for the purposes of the special payment.

                                                       V




                                         M J ADDISON
