                                  cc   Mr Angel
                                       Mr Cogbill
                                       Mrs Lee
                                       Mr Clayton
                                       Miss Wooldridge
                                       Ms Rex


Mr Goddard

TAYLOR OFFENCES

We have a number of comments on the proposals enshrined in the
draft instructions to Counsel forwarded under cover of
Mr Clayton's note to you of 21 December.

     TICKET TOUTING

     Paragraph 2.4

     It is of course for F8 to determine the vigour with which
     this problem should be tackled but we feel that the
     possible "possession within intent to supply" offence has
     been rather summarily dismissed.  Of course there will be
     a difficulty in proving intention except in the most
     blatant cases but such a formula is used, we presume
     effectively, in other contexts (eg drugs).  One
     possibility would be to introduce a rebuttable
     presumption of intention if the defendant was found
     possessing more than say three tickets.  This would not
     be watertight but any evasion would require some
     elaborate system of central supply which would be quite
     obvious to observing police officers and would in itself
     be unlawful.  I do not know, of course, whether you have
     already consulted ACPO on this possibility.


     Paragraph 2.6

     It will clearly be necessary to make the offence apply in
     all geographical situations not just public places.  One
     possibility which is not mentioned is that of a tout
     operating from private premises on which he is in fact a
     trespasser.

     Paragraph 2.7

     The private sale situation is very difficult.   The
     proposal is that such as sale should not take place in a
     public location so as to prevent sales outside football
     grounds. However the proposal would also have the effect
     of preventing such a private sale in any street or park
     even if 200 miles away from where the game is to be
     played;  is this the intention? The proposed "isolated
     incident" defence is conceded to be less than
     satisfactory.  However there are other possible
     approaches, for instance, if the defendant could
     establish that he had not been previously convicted of
ticket touting, and had in his possession no more than
one ticket this could create a rebuttable presumption
that any sale or offer fell into a legally permissible
category.  The prosecution could vitiate this defence by
producing evidence such as that of police officers
reporting observing the defendant carrying out a number
of sales and being supplied with tickets by a runner,
although he may have only had one ticket when arrested.
Another possibility would be a formal warning system as
applies to prostitutes found soliciting - but this might
not find favour with the police.  These suggestions are
not prescriptive but are examples of the kind of
alternative approaches which might be considered.

MISSILES

It will be necessary for "throwing" to be fairly
comprehensively defined to include for instance launching
by mechanical means (eg a catapult) or even to cover such
actions as letting objects roll down a parapet onto
spectators below.  The problem of defining the limits of
any offence is not easy; it would be oppressive to punish
the throwing of an unlit cigarette from one friend to
another or articles of clothing.  What may be needed is
some offence on the lines of "throwing or causing to be
released or projected any object with the intention or
likelihood of physical injury or personal offence being
caused to others".  Again this is not a prescription but
some such wide formula will probably be necessary.   We
have read with interest the discussion at as to whether
the throwing of bananas to coloured players should
constitute an offence.  Like all such intrinsically
innocuous activities it assumes its antisocial element
from the context from which it is carried out.   However
if the view expressed is correct that it is very doubtful
that such activity really is offensive it is unlikely
that the criminal law has a role to play.  We have
however noted Mrs Lee's comments on this point; if the
surrounding circumstances justified prosecution a charge
on the lines suggested above would cover the racially
offensive motive of any such activity.

CHANTING

Further consideration might be given to producing
offences directed at the mischief which lies behind the
offensive conduct rather than striving to give legal
effect to Taylor's formulae.  It is important to avoid
definitional squabbles over what constitutes "chanting"
and this again might indicate some broader offence on the
following lines:  "being a member of a group shouting or
speaking words or otherwise emitting sounds or causing
sounds to be emitted which by the nature or contexts are
likely to be regarded as indecent or offensive to a
reasonable person".
       This formula:

       (a) Includes all sounds not just those emitted
       "rhythmically" and covers the use of mechanical devices
       to produce the sounds.

       (b) Goes beyond racial or obscene abuse to cover for
       instance insulting comments about religion.

       (c) Adopts the indecency test rather than using
       "obscene" - a term to be avoided!

       PITCH ENCROACHMENT

       We have no comments on these proposals except that the
       inclusion of a "without reasonable excuse" element in any
       offence should be adequate to cover all the likely
       exceptions (to escape from fire; to go onto the pitch as

 â€¢     a doctor to attend to a collapsed player, or
       inadvertently straying perhaps as the result of crowd
       pressures).




                                     ]
                                     7 January 1991

C4 Division




d635
