                                        cc   Mr Johnson
                                             Professor Maunder
                                             Mr Sweet


Sir Peter


"SUNDAY TIMES" REPORT ABOUT CONSERVATIVE PARTY CONFERENCE


I managed to contact Mr Lester on 11 December. He told me that
he and his wife had applied early for passes for the Conservative
Party Conference, by posting off the forms well in advance.
Three weeks before the Conference, his pass arrived, but his
wife's did not. He telephoned Central Office to be told that his
wife was "on the computer". On the eve of the Conference, he
checked with Central Office four times, but his wife's pass had
not yet arrived. He was told that it would be taken to Blackpool
and she should collect it there.

So off they went to Blackpool. On arrival, they went to the desk
to collect the pass, having to stand in the rain outside. When
they eventually got attention, there was no pass. Mrs Lester was
then asked to complete a new form, and get two more passport
photographs.  "Reluctantly and steaming", Mr and Mrs Lester
decided there was no other course, and went round to Boots to get
the passport photographs. Thereafter they were processed, and
eventually got in.

Mr Lester made the point that by comparison with those attending
a football match, delegates to the Conservative Party Conference
were by and large orderly and civilised. He thinks that, if the
Party can't organise a pass system efficiently, it is unlikely
poor football clubs will have any greater chance of doing so. He
mentioned particularly the poor quality of stewards on which most
small clubs have to rely. He remains opposed to the membership
scheme.



                                         RkW
                                        R M WHALLEY

15 December 1989
