SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY FIRE SERVICE                                                      #
MEM ORANDUM
                                         For the attention of       Your
  To      Chief Fire Officer                                        Ref.

                                         Please contact              Our
 From                                    Tel.                        Ref.



Subject   Major Accident - Hillsborough Football Ground             Date    24.05.1989




          Sir,

          I am 38 years of age, single and I am employed by the South Yorkshire
          County Fire Service as a Fire Control Operator. My duties include
          accepting incoming telephone calls from other emergency services and
          the   general   public,  recording such calls and despatching the
          appropriate fire appliance in respect of the incident in question.  I
          then maintain radio contact with the despatched appliances throughout
          the duration of the incident.

          At 1512 hours, Saturday, 15th April, 1989 I was on duty in the Control
          Room,  situated at Fire Service Headquarters, Wellington Street,
          Sheffield.  I was at that time in telephone contact with Police Force
          Control situated at Police Headquarters,       Snig Hill, Sheffield and
          passing to them information in respect of appliances having been
          despatched to a house fire, where there was a possibility of an
          elderly lady trapped in the house, situated at
          |            This subsequently resulted in the death of the elderly
          lady. Whilst in conversation with the Police Force Control at 1513
          the following conversation took place :

          Police               Can we have cutting        gear for Hillsborough please
                               straight away.

          Fire Control         Just a minute, right what's the address?

          Police               Cutting equipment for Hillsborough     football   ground
                               straight away.

          Fire Control         Hillsborough football ground?

          Police               Yes, Hillsborough football ground.

          Fire Control         What road is that on, do you know?

          Police               There has been a major accident, all the ambulances
                               are up there.

          Fire Control         What road is it on?

          Police               I have no idea, Hillsborough football ground.

          Fire Control         What road is it on, do you know?

                               "Hillsborough football ground, what road is it on?”
                               (this was said to someone in Police Force Control) -
                               "Penistone Road" (to Fire Control)
Fire Control      Penistone Road.

Police            Penistone Road O.K.

■Fire Control     Penistone Road,    just      a    minute    -   what's       exactly
                  involved?

Police            It's football,     a   big       match,    Liverpool     v     Notts
                  Forest.

Fire Control      Yes, but why do you want us, you said it was an                  RTA
                  (Road Traffic Accident).

Police            No, no, no, major incident inside the ground.

Fire Control      Major   incident   inside, do you know exactly what it
                  is?

Police            No I don't, they want all the cutting gear.

Fire Control      For what, do you know?

Police            Hang on a sec.

Police            (Male voice) - Hello.

Fire Control      Hello, now you want some cutting gear, what                  exactly
                  is it for?

Police            There has been a major accident at Hillsborough
                  football ground where the semi-final is, the crowds
                  have forced their way in, they have broken fences
                  and gates down, I don't know exactly what it is but
                  there are people trapped.

Fire Control      Right, O.K. leave it with us.

The above conversation was simultaneously recorded on audio tape at
the Fire Control and the tape has been preserved and can be produced
in evidence if so required.

I did not know what street Hillsborough Football Ground was on and I
needed to ascertain the name of the street and district before I could
attempt to get the computer to display a list of the nearest available
pumping and special appliances. This is why I kept asking the Police
Force Control for further information as to the location.

During the conversation between myself and Police Force Control,
temporary Senior Fire Control Operator            who was monitoring
the call, suggested that it could be located on Penistone Road and the
Police confirmed this.  I also knew that before a decision could be
made as to the type and number of appliances required to attend I
would have to know why the Fire Service were needed and what was
involved.

Police Force Control were asking for cutting gear and I needed to know
why.  I kept on asking questions so that I could ascertain what type
of emergency situation we were required to attend.
The pre-determined attendance for Penistone Road, Owlerton is 2
pumping appliances. Due to the unusual nature of the incident I did
not feel qualified to decide what attendance should be made. I waited
for specific instructions which were given to me by temporary Senior
Fire Control Operator               and I was instructed to mobilise 6
pumping appliances, one emergency tender and the control unit.       I
immediately acted on these instructions.

The appliances were immediately despatched and the first appliance was
recorded arriving at the scene at 1522 hours.    Together with other
Fire Control Operators I then subsequently maintained contact with all
appliances and officers at the scene of . the incident together with
other ongoing incidents until the end of my watch at 1800 hours.
