From;   R.A. McCaughan
        HMIC
        Ext 2134                                    cc Mr Dear


        21 November, 1991


        Mrs Moody
        F 2 Division

HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER:      LETTER FROM GEORGE HOWARTH MP

Further to our telephone conversation of 19 November, I confirm
that the enquiry was conducted throughout by Mervyn JONES then
Assistant Chief Constable, West Midlands ( Now Deputy Chief
Constable Cheshire). Initially Mr Dear was nominally in charge
of the enquiry, but as the incoming Chief Constable Mr Hadfield
had been in attendance at the match, Mr SHARPE Chief Constable
of Cumbria was nominated to take over this responsibility.



R A MCCAUGHANA
DETECTIVE CHIEF ^SUPERINTENDENT
                                                    1 9 N Â°V I S#
 From:      Miss G Harrison
            E Division
            Ext. 3560                                JjW -
            QAG.Room 983                              <isW
                                           cc   HMCIC
                                                Mr Goddard
 19 November 1991                               Miss A M Edwards
                                                Mr Miles
                                                Mrs Catto
CRN/91 61/Ah



Mrs Moody
F2 Division



HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER: LETTER FROM GEORGE HOWARTH MP

Thank you for your note of 14 November in which you sought
comments on a draft reply to the letter of 4 November from
George Howarth MP about the Hillsborough disaster.
I am generally content with the paragraphs on pages 2 and 3
which refer to the inquest. However, in the last paragraph on
page 2, second line, I am not sure that the phrase, "(as I
believe some relatives are)", adds anything. I would suggest
that this is deleted. It might possibly be taken as an
encouragement to relatives to apply to the Attorney-General.
But he has already responded to a Parliamentary Question from
Mr Howarth to the effect that no one has placed before him any
material which would justify a Section 13 application. The
Attorney-General has also recently written a discouraging
letter to one of the victims' relatives on the same point.




                              lfY^~   G HARRISON (MISS)




dis-moody
                                                                    I*/H
