                                        cc   Mr   Yates
                                             Mr   Turney
                                             Mr   Bolton
                                             Mr   Goddard
                                             Mr   Watts
                                             Mr   Mould
                                             Mr   Smith


Mr Moriartv



HILLSBOROUGH INTERIM REPORT


We spoke today about whether now was a sensible time to let Home
Office colleagues see the current draft of recommendations for
inclusion in the interim report.

2.   The current draft has been prepared by me.  It is based upon
(i) points which I noted during the oral hearings and (ii)
suggestions by the two Assessors.  It does not contain anything
written by Lord Justice Taylor.

3.   Lord Justice Taylor is to discuss his possible
recommendations today with his Assessors and draft them tomorrow;
we agreed that it would be sensible for me to take account at
this stage of any comments colleagues might have as to their
viability.

4.   I have therefore distributed numbered copies to you, Mr
Turney, Mr Bolton, Mr Goddard, Mr Mould and Mr Smith (6 copies).
I have agreed that Mr Mould should take a copy of his copy for Mr
Watts.

5.   I particularly request that this document should not go
outside the Home Office or be further copied without reference to
me.  I would not want it to be copied to the Department of the
Environment or the South Yorkshire Police; nor would I want it
to be discussed with them at all.

6.    Miss Bannister has asked me to let the Home Secretary have
draft recommendations as soon as they are available.   I have said
I will do this as soon as they are in a suitably final form for
it to be worthwhile the Home Secretary turning his attention to
them.




                                             R M WHALLEY
27 July 1989
