)
INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH              The Rt Hon LordJustice Taylor
STADIUM DISASTER
                                           50 Queen Anneâ€™s Gate
                                           London SW1H 9AT
                                           01-273 2577/3602/2370

A H Turney Esq
Home Office
50 Queen Anne's Gate
London
SW1H 9AT
                                                  23 May 1989
                                           Date




Dear Mr Turney


HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY

As you may know, the Home Secretary has asked Lord Justice Taylor
to enquire into the events at Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April
1989 in which 95 people lost their lives and many were injured.
Lord Justice Taylor is being assisted by two Assessors, Mr Brian
Johnson QPM, Chief Constable of Lancashire, and Professor Leonard
Maunder OBE, Professor of Mechanical Engineering at the
University of Newcastle-upon-Tyne.

Lord Justice Taylor's terms of reference are as follows:-

     "To inquire into the events at Sheffield Wednesday
     Football Ground on 15 April 1989 and to make
     recommendations about the needs of crowd control and
     safety at sports grounds."

The first stage of the Inquiry consists of oral hearings in
Sheffield, which began on 15 May.   In the second stage, Lord
Justice Taylor proposes to consider any written submissions which
may be put to him. As you may know, Lord Justice Taylor has
already issued a general invitation for written submissions, but
I am now writing to you specifically on his behalf to ask if you
would like to submit written material to his Inquiry.   Perhaps
you would be kind enough to acknowledge this letter (to the
address above) and indicate whether you intend to respond to Lord
Justice Taylor's invitation. He would find it convenient if any
written submissions could reach him by 12 June if possible:
perhaps you could also kindly indicate whether or not you will be
able to meet that timetable.  Submissions should likewise be sent
to me at the Inquiry address above.
It would be helpful if six sets of any written material could be
sent.  It would be also be helpful if the material could be
indexed and summarised wherever possible.

Lord Justice Taylor may wish to invite some of those who submit
written evidence to him to discuss it with him at a later stage.

                                        Yours sincerely




                                        R M WHALLEY
                                        Secretary to the Inquiry
