SUMMARY OF STATEMENT BY DR EASTWOOD,   SUBMITTED 25 MAY
1989


Eastwood and Partners are retained as consultants to
Sheffield Wednesday, Sheffield United, Sunderland,
Chesterfield, Rotherham United.

First retained Sheffield Wednesday 1978, good liaison
th rough out.

Crush barriers  believe first installed 1965.
Improvements recommended January 1979, including new
designs;  installed June-November 1979, and tested
according to Green Guide.  Re-tested January 1980.
Agreement reached for subsequent testing of 20%
barriers/year.  West Terrace re-tested 1983, 1988,
including No. 124A (failed April 1989) and those left
bent.

Perimeter fences  believe first installed soon after
Ibrox disaster.  West terrace strengthened 1979, spiked
extensions at top added later.

Radial fences  in west terrace requested by Club, 1981,
with gates at rear to be under police control.  Two
installed October-November 1981 (separating Pen 2/Pen 3
and Pen 4/Pen 5), two more during summer 1985 (?)
(separating Pens 3/4; and creating a corridor between
Pens 4/5).  Discussion in 1981 included whether crush
barriers should be left passing continuously through
radial fences;  police at first objected, but
subsequently agreed.

Barrier 124A was divided later at the 1985 central
radial fence.

Perimeter Gates  Nos. 1, 2, 4, 5 and 6 (counting from
Pen 1) are unchanged since pre-1979, except for new
release latches.  Origin of Gate 7 uncertain, possibly
added by Club after 1980.   Gate 3 constructed under
Eastwood's direction, 1985.

All gates were installed prior to the 1986 Green Guide,
which recommends a minimum width of 1.1m, and adds
(para 59) "The required width for any particular
section is dependent on the crowd flow it will be
required to carry".  Eastwood (p.24) alleges a
preference by police for restricted widths.  Several
gates (but not those in Pens 3, 4) have no steps
approaching from the terrace, giving a height of over
3ft to be negotiated at exit.

Tunnel Ramp has downward slopes of 1 in 12, then 1 in
8, then 1 in 6, the 'a gentle inclination'.  A lengthy
account is given of various meetings to discuss the
          departure from the 1976 Green Guide;  arguments follow
          in favour of the decision to make no change including
          'lack of clarity' in the Guide.

          Rearrangements at Leppinqs Lane were first discussed
          at Club's request in 1981.  The matter was dropped
          until 1985, where a succession of proposals was put
          forward by Eastwood.  These offered a variety of
          alternative schemes, influenced by the Club's wish to
          segregate supporters and related to the construction of
          a central radial fence in the west terrace.   In the
          early versions, the number of turnstiles was to be
          increased to 29, then to 34 (at the Club's suggestion),
          with various divisions for the terraces and the stands.
          In May 1985, the Club's concern about cost, was voiced
          and, following further exchanges, the present
          arrangement of 23 turnstiles was approved, apparently
          by all concerned.

NOTE (L M ) The account of the 1985 discussions shows that earlier
            proposals referred to marked increases in the total
            number of turnstiles (from 23 to 29 and then to 34),
            but the final number remained at 23.  The way in which
            turnstiles distributed supporters into viewing areas
            started well but deteriorated as the discussions went
            on.  Provision for the central terraces seems to have
            been little regarded.



                                              LM
                                              4 May 1989
NOTE ON PHYSICAL ASPECTS OF THE GROUND


1.   Crowd density in Pen 3.

           Estimates for 2.52pm and shortly after 3.00pm
           are being prepared by HSE.

2.   Crowd density at entrance to A-G.

           An estimate of capacity, based on area and
           assumed packing, is in preparation.

3.   Crowd flow through turnstiles A-G.

           Counts of flow rates are available from
           computer data, supplemented by video.

4.   Entry by climbing walls at A-G.

           Videos show only a small number involved.

5.   Turnstile mechanics.

           Checked.

6.   Crush barrier dimensions and distribution.

           checked for comparison with Green Guide.

7.   Crush barrier strengths.

     i.    Eastwood's 1988 tests being reviewed.

     ii.   Assessments of broken barrier (sequence of
           fracture, fracture loads) being made with a
           view to laboratory testing.

     iii. Calculations of barrier strengths, based on
          dimensions and material properties, being
          made.

     iv.   Examination of physical data (chiefly
           corrosion) of broken barrier and other
           barriers being made.

     v.    Testing of selected barriers on site.

                Under consideration.

8.   Crowd flow through Gate C>

           So far, difficult to estimate;   new video may
           help.

9.   Noise levels.

           An attempt is being made to estimate tannoy
           and crowd levels, using the assessments taken
           at Anfield.

10.   Crowd capacities in Pens 3, 4.

           Being determined according to Green Guide.

Other Matters

1.    Medical view of injuries?

2.    Statements of injured?
