                                                                        /Vt
       HOME OFFICE
       Queen Anne’s Gate London SW1H 9AT
                                    Direct line 01-273
                                   Switchboard 01-273 3°° °



                                                       Your reference


                                                       O ur reference


                                                       Date
                                                          — March 1990




Dear

Thank you for your recent letter regarding the cost of the
Hillsborough Disaster Inquiry and the policing of football grounds.

Following meetings with representatives of both police authorities
concerned - West Midlands and South Yorkshire - the South Yorkshire
Police Authority was informed in June that, in view of the
exceptional and unforeseen circumstances of the Hillsborough
tragedy, the Government was prepared to give South Yorkshire a
special payment from central funds to assist them with the
additional costs of the work carried out on their behalf by the
West Midlands Police.

Under section 15 of the Police Act 1964, a chief officer of police
may provide on request "special services” at any place within his
police area, subject to the payment to the police authority of such
charges as they may determine.  "Special police services" are
services which would not normally be provided within the general
duties of the police to preserve law and order.

If the organisers of a football match want police officers inside
the ground where the event is being held, to maintain order, they
can request a police presence and they will then be charged for
this as a special police service. The costs of any officers
deployed outside the ground, for such purposes as crowd or traffic
control, would be borne by the police authority because this would
be regarded as part of the force's normal policing functions.

                                                      Yours sincerely




                                                      MRS M A WITHER
