                                                    rW Udkn/        0!
NOTE OF A MEETING ON MONDAY 11 DECEMBER AT 10.30am WITH THE LOCAL
AUTHORITY ASSOCIATIONS


Present:   Lord Justice Taylor     AMA
           Mr Whalley              Mr S Bassam
           Mr Sweet                Mr J Pimblett
           Mrs Wither              Mr M Hartland

                                   ACC

                                   Mr M D Watson
                                   Mr D J Fox
                                   Mr R Hodgson

                                   COSLA

                                   Mr R McCluskey
                                   Cllr J Meldrum
                                   Mr R Calderwood

                                   ADC

                                   Mr G McCartney
                                   Mr M Ashley


Safety Certificates


1.   Lord Justice Taylor said the purpose of this meeting was
find out how the certificate operation should be operated and how
far the situation at Sheffield was typical. He also wished to
know their views on the provision on the Football Spectators Act
for FLA to have an overseeing role regulating the discharge of
certificating duties by local authorities.


2.   Mr Hartland from West Yorkshire Fire Service said that when
the West Yorkshire County Council was abolished, much work was
done at County Council level to ensure that every ground was
inspected. Certificates were put into existence in some cases
prior to completion of work. There was therefore no confusion as
to the work required at each ground.   Any areas of concern were
put out of use.


3.   Mr Calderwood said they have a very formal machinery for
Safety Certificates and the situation at Sheffield would not be
repeated at Strathclyde. The working group in Strathclyde works
under the Deputy Chief Executive and they are a clearly
identified group embracing all disciplines. The working party
reports to the General Purposes Committee on a regular basis and
once a Certificate is recommended any amendments to the
Certificate must come through the General Purposes Committee. Mr
Hodgson said the position was substantially the same in the Shire
counties.


Local Authorities and Clubs


4.   Lord Justice Taylor asked for views on the following
situations:-


     i.    where the members of the local authority have a close
           relationship with the club making them more favourable
           in their decisions eg no payment for policing ground at
           all;


     ii.   where the local authority owns the ground making them
           the plaintiff in their own cause;


     iii. where the clubs engage impressive engineering experts
           and officers of the local authority are overawed by
           these specialists and persuaded to allow things to go
           by.


5.   Mr Watson said that under the Local Authorities Access to
Information Act, the report to the General Purposes Committee is
available to members of the public. Under the Police Act 1964,
charging is a matter for the police authorities.   Mr Hodgson said
Hampshire took a survey of police authorities and it was found
they charged a realistic rate ie what it costs the police
authority.


6.   Mr Meldrum said the policing of grounds is based on crowds
and whether clubs can afford it or not.   There is a prescribed
rate for each grade. Mr Calderwood said he felt there should be
fixed public sector charge for policing as anything less that
this made it open to misinterpretation.   However, he has never
experienced any problems with special relationships.   Also Mr Fox
said the Shire counties were not aware of any over close
relationships and submitted a document relating to AFC
Bournemouth.


7.   Lord Justice Taylor asked if local authorities were the
right bodies to have the task of providing Safety Certificates.
Mr Pimblett said that at Liverpool, Mr Bush provided an advisory
service to clubs.   Mr McCartney said that local government should
retain the licensing power in Shire areas since they still have a
two tier system but have good working relationships between the
tiers.


National Forum/Standards


8.   Lord Justice Taylor asked about the idea of a national forum
for discussion. Mr Hodgson said they did not need both a forum
and the FLA.   Section 13 of the Act states the FLA's function is
"keeping under review" and it should be concerned with best
practice and guidelines.   The ACC view is that they should work
within that.


9.   Mr Calderwood said that a minor adjustment on access to the
pitch had been made at Celtic Park 18 months ago and the local
authority were able to respond immediately.   If the proposal had
been referred to a central body, the speed of action would have
been lost so there were advantages to the existing system.


10.   Lord Justice Taylor raised the problem of the variation in
application of standards between local authorities but it was
hoped it would be the function of the FLA to iron these out.


11.   Mr Fox commented that Section 13 of the Football Spectators
Act would ensure even application.   So far as a National
Inspectorate was concerned he was anxious that it would not be
aware of local issues and be able to make proper judgements. He
said it should give only guidance as each stadium must be the
subject of local inspection.


12.   Lord Justice Taylor asked if the HSE should have the role of
overseeing the local authority exercise by applying the Health
and Safety at Work Act to football grounds.


13. Mr Bassam said the HSE was not sufficiently resourced and
did not have the right range of experience. Mr Hodgson said he
would not want a secondary level of accountability. Mr
Calderwood commented that people lose sight of their
responsibility when there is an Inspectorate.

Advisory Group


14. Lord Justice Taylor said there was some confusion over the
terms working group and advisory group. However his
recommendations had in mind simply one group and he asked if
there was any need to be more specific about its composition and
operation.


15. Mr Fox said that local government is by definition varied
and he would not want to define the structure too closely
provided it worked.   Mr McCluskey said they agreed with the
interim recommendations but there was some doubt about the role
of the supporters' clubs and the clubs themselves as set out in
recommendation 17.


16.   Lord Justice Taylor said some others had suggested that
club/supporters should be consulted but not be part of safety
group. Mr Ashley replied that was why he had suggested a
separate liaison group but Lord Justice Taylor said this led to
proliferation.


Green Guide


17.   Lord Justice Taylor then asked if some aspects of the Green
Guide should be required to be included in the Safety Certificate
and, if so, what aspects.


18. Mr Pimblett said there should be legislation on capacity,
means of escape provision and fire fighting equipment. Lord
Justice Taylor asked should this also apply to gradients and
evacuation times. Mr Pimblett said that the flow rate of 750
through turnstiles was too high. Mr McCluskey said that having
negotiated on matters the local authority must specify figures in
the Certificate.


19. Lord Justice Taylor referred to the Middlesborough incident
last weekend and said he was worried that the suggestion that
police should have discretion on the day could lead to a
disaster. Mr Fox said he felt it should be a criminal offence to
go to all ticket matches without a ticket.

Relocation


20.   Mr McCartney said that many local authorities face the
problem of centrally located grounds,.- Increasingly it was cost
effective to comply with the Green Guide at old sites but the
Final Report might provide an opportunity to give encouragement
to build new grounds.


21.   Lord Justice Taylor said to move, motivation, a new site and
funding was required.   Mr McCartney said a joint circular was
issued inviting clubs to work with local authorities and met with
some success but some comment from the Inquiry would also help.
Lord Justice Taylor said the alternative was to redevelop
existing sites.


22.   Mr Calderwood commented that there was pressure on
redeveloping existing sites as new sites lead to problems with
infrastructural needs.


23.   Lord Justice Taylor said it was also necessary to consider
the quality of life for the cities.    He said that on the
continent, grounds were owned by the local authority and money
was not a problem as the ground was regarded as a common
facility. He asked if there was any future for local authorities
taking a lead to finance on a loan basis.


24.   Mr Bassam said if it were not for the capital controls then
there would more interest in this.    Mr Watson said it was
difficult to achieve in the current financial climate. Mr
Meldrum said they could encourage clubs to redevelop existing
sites such as Millwall and Preston by developing community
initiatives.


25.     Mr McCartney said Luton was negotiating for relocation at
the moment.     Local authorities do have the opportunity to be a
catalyst for relocation of grounds but community provision must
be made.


26. Mr Calderwood asked if where the local authority owned the
ground, had they been able to cope more effectively. Examples
were given such as Preston, Halifax and Aldershot. He said he
did not like the idea of local authority ownership but Mr
McCartney commented that ownership was not crucial.


27. Lord Justice Taylor said the ground at Nimes-'cost £17
million and £16 million was provided by the townitself since
there was great civic pride in it.

Touts


28.     Lord Justice Taylor then went on to the subject of ticket
touts and how difficult it was in civil liberties terms to get an
offence on the statute book. Touts encouraged people to arrive
without tickets and also confused segregation.      He asked for the
views on making it an offence to sell tickets at a designated
ground on the day or over face value.


29.     Mr Meldrum said it was the responsibility of the club how
tickets were sold and     suggested that there should be different
colours for different     sides.   Mr Fox said he saw the merit of the
arguments but with a full ticket match.     Mr Watson said that if
this legislation was introduced, the police would have to be
given clear responsibility.

Fencing


30.     Lord Justice Taylor then asked for views on fencing.   He
said they had a bad effect on morale but there was still the
danger of invasion. in Europe there is a 2.2m fence or barrier
making it impossible to get on to the pitch.     However, it must
also be a means of escape.


31. Mr Calderwood said     he did not like fencing but it depended
on the structure of the    ground. Mr Meldrum said there was a
tradition for people to    be as near the field as possible but on
the continent there was    usually a sterile area or moat.


32. Lord Justice Taylor asked for their views on making it an
offence to go onto the pitch except as a means of escape. Mr
Hartland commented that it would have to be carefully worded but
it would assist the police greatly. Lord Justice Taylor said the
FMA could regard pitch going as a bannable offence.

Capacity


33.   Lord Justice Taylor then asked for views on capacity.       He
said the Green Guide gave 54 as a maximum but no one at
Hillsborough really knew what it looked like. He remarked that
there had been confusion as to the starting point from which his
recommended 15% reduction took place but the formula should start
from the Green Guide standard.


34.   Mr McCluskey said that the reduction had been introduced by
and large but reduction obviously affected commercial concerns of
the club.     Lord Justice Taylor asked if the Green Guide should be
left as a guide and leave it to the local authority to fix
figure.     Mr McCluskey said a top and bottom figure should be
fixed. Mr Pimblett said clubs have financial considerations and
local authorities are concerned with safety. He would prefer to
keep the 15% reduction.

Alcohol


35.   Lord Justice Taylor then asked for views on alcohol and
cited the example of Scotland where alcohol has been banned since
1986. Mr Meldrum said there should be guidelines on toilet
facilities. Mr Calderwood said there was no enthusiasm for
reversal as it had worked well. Mr Bassam said the police would
not be interested but Lord Justice Taylor said this was not what
he had found.


Early Kick-off


36.   Lord Justice Taylor then asked for views on early kick-offs
of Sunday matches. Mr Calderwood said he did not think midday
kick-off would make much difference although some may not be able
to drink as much. Mr Hodgson said it was a local decision but
Lord Justice Taylor argued that if it was the national norm,
people get used to it.


Extension of Green Guide


37. Mr Hartland asked that the work of the Green Guide be
extended to pop concerts, open air religious meetings etc.
NOTE ON CLUBS MENTIONED DURING RECENT LOCAL AUTHORITIES MEETING


Millwall - Mr Hortop


In 1986 a sponsorship agreement was set up with the local
authority which has led to a close knit relationship with
Lewisham Council. Mr Hortop will send a copy of this agreement.


In addition there is the Millwall Community scheme which started
three years ago and involves Southwark, Lewisham, Millwall and
the Sports Council who contribute funds. It is run by a
management committee chaired by a senior inspector of ILEA who is
independent.  It employs two full time community officers and
will be advertising for a third in April, probably a woman. They
also have a two day a week administrator. Since they have no
facilities at Millwall,   it means the officers have to seek out
facilities within the area for the tennis clubs etc.

A book of the community scheme which sets out its functions in
detail will be sent to us.


Aldershot - Mr Pollard(Secretary)


The Council have owned   the ground since 1926 and they pay a
peppercorn rent of £400 a month. The FC however own the
buildings while the council own the ground and maintain it. The
club have been trying to buy the ground for some time but the
council will not sell.   Council ownership has led to problems in
that the club are still responsible for the safety aspect and pay
for work done in this connection. The Chairman wishes to
redevelop the ground but is reluctant to do so while the council
own it. However it is unlikely that the club would be asked to
leave by the council despite the nature of tenure since it is
written into the deeds that it must remain a recreation ground.
Halifax - Mrs Pettifor (Secretary)


 The council own the football ground and have done so since 1987.
 The stadium was originally on lease to the club but in 1987 the
 council bought the lease back from the club for £360,000 to keep
  U -» V V * -« —
■leave football in the town. They also took up 72% of the share
 issue and retain this. The club now pay £20,000 to the council
 each year but are also given a grant by the council
INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH                T he Rt Hon Lord Ju stice Taylor
STADIUM DISASTER r (
                 \ l \i       A.i/UU/kv      SO Q u ee n A nne’s Gate
                          ~                  London SW1I I 9AT
                                             01-2732577/3602/2370




Adrian Titcombe Esq
The Football Association Ltd
16 Lancaster Gate
LONDON
W2 3LW

                                          13,December 1989




JW K I                          l


Thank you for your letter of 4 December. It is
very kind of you to suggest that Lord Justice
Taylor might have a discussion with Mr Walker
and Mr Crawford. As you imagined, Lord Justice
Taylor's time is rather limited, and I do not
think that at present he will be able to take
up your kind offer. But perhaps we could come
back to you if we see the opportunity.


                                                 \J         “     Jf

                                               KHHv
                                         R M WHALLEY
                                    Secretary to the Inquiry
