NOTE OF A MEETING WITH THE FOOTBALL SUPPORTERS ASSOCIATION AND
THE NATIONAL FEDERATION OF FOOTBALL SUPPORTERS CLUBS HELD AT
2.30PM ON TUESDAY 14 NOVEMBER


Present:   Lord Justice Taylor      Mr Rogan Taylor, FSA
           Mr Johnson               Mr Nigel Grant, FSA
           Professor Maunder
           Mr Whalley               Mr Alan Kershaw, NFFSC
           Mr Sweet                 Ms Monica Hartland, NFFSC


Unification of FSA and NFFSC

1.   Lord Justice Taylor asked what consideration had been given
to the merging of the two bodies so as to provide a more
effective, unified spectator body, speaking with one voice on
behalf of the 'true supporter'.

2.   The FSA explained that although they had stimulated
discussion with the NFFSC, for example, on putting out common
policy documents, the roles of the two bodies, did not dovetail
exactly. The NFFSC's historical origins lay with supporters
clubs at individual grounds, and the Federation's approach and
philosophy differed from those of the FSA. The FSA, for example,
was more likely than the NFFSC to have contact with casual
supporters. It was disadvantageous that if supporters were to be
represented on bodies like the FMA, there would need to be
discussion between the two organisations as to who should
nominate that representative. That said, both sought to reflect
'grass-roots' opinion through regional branch meetings, and it
was acknowledged that there was likely to be increasingly close
co-operation between them in the future.


All-seater Stadia

3.   There was consensus among the FSA/NFFSC that although the
proportion of seating should be increased, some standing should
remain.    Their reasons for so believing were largely emotional:
it had been a feature of football life for many generations, and
there was often a nostalgic bond between family generations and a
particular standing area; English football was the envy of
Europe because of the intensely charged atmosphere generated on
standing terraces, where young, enthusiastic supporters had an
opportunity to "let off steam", and where there existed a channel
of communication and expression for youngsters who might
otherwise have no means of dissipating their high spirits and
energy. There was also a cost consideration since many fans
would be reluctant to pay even a small additional premium for
seating.

4.   That said there was recognition that spectator comforts
would need to be improved if a wider audience was to be
attracted, and a major way of doing so was by the introduction of
covered seating. Finally, there was the practical consideration
that bodies like FIFA would require World Cup matches to be
played at all-seater stadia.


Fencing

5.   Although the NFFSC had, albeit reluctantly, accepted in its
written evidence the need for perimeter fencing, there was a
general consensus that fencing should be replaced by alternative
methods of control. There were two distinct disadvantages with
fencing, the first being the obstruction to visibility, the
second being the safety problems it created.


6.   The police were felt largely to blame for the introduction
of 'high-security' fencing at many grounds, seen by supporters
clubs as a retrograde step. In discussion they favoured a
sterile area between the front row of spectators and a low
perimeter fence, in turn separated from the advertising hoardings
so as to provide a psychological deterrent to pitch invasion
whilst in no way interfering with safety. Such physical
impediments were to be accompanied by a specific offence of going
onto the pitch without reasonable excuse, or for the purpose of
evacuation, although it was recognised that the offence would
need careful drafting.   It was felt, however, that both the clubs
and supporters would accept such an arrangement.
Ticket Touts

7. On the question of touts, both the FSA and the NFFSC wished
to see the problem dealt with, but worried about distinguishing
between the genuine fan off-loading a spare ticket and the real
ticket-tout. After discussion, they accepted that banning the
re-sale of tickets on the day within a specified distance of the
ground might solve the problem and the fact that genuine fans
might occasionally lose out was a necessary but unavoidable
consequence. Their view was that the majority of fans would
accept such legislation, particularly after a period of reÂ­
education .


Forgeries

8.   Although a problem on occasions, forged tickets were felt to
have had less of an impact than the unsatisfactory nature of
ticket allocation which fed the black-market. The FA executive
staff had accepted the criticisms made, but had so far been
unable to influence the Council, whose members were major
beneficiaries of a system which allocated 28% of FA cup tickets
to County FAs. The vast majority of these tickets ended up on
the black market. What was needed was a reduction in this
allocation and a redistribution to the spectators of the
respective teams.


Purpose Built Stadia

9.   The supporters' association felt that new stadia, perhaps
regional, could be funded centrally if the Government were to
adopt a more equitable approach towards the pool betting tax.     By
comparison with horse-racing, football was felt to come off
badly, and the Government needed to invest more in it. There was
general recognition, however, that the Government's own
perspective was likely to be very different.
Alcohol

10. The FSA/NFFSC favoured a relaxation on the ban on alcohol
sales at grounds as part of a broader strategy to entice people
to enter earlier. Such a strategy would incorporate financial
incentives (for example, a free ticket after a number of early
entries) and improvements to the catering and entertainment
facilities. The aim would be to make the ground an interesting
and worthwhile place to visit, and fans themselves would welcome
the greater use of videos, and the relaying of games live by CCTV
to overspill screens at other grounds to discourage ticketless
fans from travelling.


Football Spectators Act

11.   Both organisations were united in their opposition to the
scheme, which, above all else, they felt to be unworkable in
practice. The experience of clubs such as Tranmere Rovers, who
had already experimented with plastic cards, showed that the
technology simply could not cope. If the card was in any way
damaged or bent, the machine would reject it, whilst the machines
themselves had malfunctioned when damp. If the error rate was as
low as 0.5% that would still cause thousands of cards to be
rejected each Saturday and enormous delays as people at the
turnstiles argued about their individual cases.

12.   In addition, the scheme hit law-abiding supporters as much
as the hooligan, and was unnecessarily sweeping in its approach.
It would undoubtedly deter the casual supporter, in many cases
precisely the respectable spectator whom the authorities should
be trying to attract. The preferred approach was to target the
hooligan element and to encourage responsible attitudes and moves
among fans generally. As it stood, the membership scheme would
be regarded as a challenge by the hooligan and as an unnecessary
imposition by the law-abiding. Once individuals had lost the
habit of attending, it would be very difficult to win them back.


13.   The idea of requiring hooligans to attend designated centres
on match days found a wide measure of support. Although in
isolation, the administrative costs of such a scheme might appear
high, they had to be set against the much larger costs associated
with the introduction of a compulsory nationwide membership
scheme.

Early Kick-offs

14. There was no objection to varying the kick-off times,
although for fans who had to travel any distance, it would be
impracticable if games began as early as 10.00am. There were
also some difficulties with Sunday matches, given the less-
frequent public transport services. Furthermore, there would no
doubt be demands on timetabling imposed by television companies
and the needs of the pools promoters. That said, it was accepted
that there was nothing sacrosanct about the traditional 3 o/clock
kick-off.

Liaison with the Police

15. Both the FSA and the NFFSC expressed a desire to improve
relationships with the police, by means of regular liaison which
would improve the flow of information between the various bodies.
It was felt essential, too, that supporters be given sufficient
opportunity by clubs to put their points of view, and that they
be involved and consulted far more than happened at present.


Overseas Travel - Role of FA

16.   Criticism was levelled at the FA for discouraging travel
abroad and for its decision not to become involved in the
organisation of such trips. In Scotland, involvement of the SFA
and the establishment of a national travel club had helped
engender national pride amongst Scottish fans which worked in a
positive, rather than negative, way. In England, responsible
fans heeded advice and stayed at home, leaving the unscrupulous
to cause trouble abroad;   in Scotland responsible fans were
encouraged to travel, and the self-discipline of the travelling
fans themselves deterred unruly behaviour.
