PARLIAMENTARY QUESTION FOR PRIORITY WRITTEN ANSWER ON 12 MAY 1989



Mr David Blunkett (Sheffield, Brightside): To ask the Secretary of
State for the Home Department, pursuant to his Answer to the
honourable Member for Birmingham, Selly Oak of 28th April, Official
Report, column 702, what steps he is taking to reimburse the South
Yorkshire Police Authority for the costs arising from the public
inquiry into the Hillsborough disaster.




DRAFT REPLY


A meeting is to be held between Home Office officials and officers
of the South Yorkshire Police Authority on 18 May to discuss the
representations made by the authority over the costs of the
inquiries being undertaken by the West Midlands police.
BACKGROUND NOTE

Mr Blunkett is concerned that the costs incurred by the West
Midlands police    in their inquiries following the Hillsborough
disaster should not fall on the South Yorkshire Police Authority.
The Secretary of State's answer to Mr Beaumont-Dark which is
referred to by Mr Blunkett is attached at Annex A.  That gives no
commitments on South Yorkshire's costs.


Mr Addison's submission of 28 April suggested that the best way
forward, in sorting out the precise mechanics of how the West
Midlands police should be reimbursed, would be an early meeting
between the Home Office and the South Yorkshire Police Authority
initially as the force in whose area the tragedy occurred. A copy
of Mr Addison's letter to the Clerk of South Yorkshire Police
Authority is attached at Annex B.       The meeting has now been
arranged for Thursday 18 May.
