                        I N Q U I R Y      I N T O       T H E       H I L L S B O R O U G H
                A
                                        S T A D I U M        D I S A S T E R




                B
                                                         Before

                                               LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR




    •           C
                                                MR. B. JOHNSON
                                  (Chief Constable, Lancashire Constabulary)

                                                           and

                                                 PROF. L MAUNDER.
                D
                                                       (ASSESSORS)




                E
                                                           At

                                                     The Town Hall,

                                                        Sheffield,

                                                            on
                    F
                                              Friday,    14th July, 1989.




                                             TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS
                G                                    (Morning Session)




                                        From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
                                             Official Shorthand Writers,
                                        55, Queen Street, Sheffield.  Si 2DX.
                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                               INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT


                                                                     Page

                          Opening Remarks by LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR       1.

                          Opening Remarks by MR. COLLINS               1.
                  B
                          Closing submission by MR. HYTNER             2   .
                          Closing submission by MR. JACKSON            5.

                          Closing submission by MR. MULLER             7.

                          Closing submission by MR. MURPHY             8.
    •             c       Closing submisison by MR. DYSON             11 .

                          Closing submission by MR. KALLIPETIS        15.

                          Closing submission by MR. GLASGOW           18.

                          Closing submission by MR. TOULSON           21 .
                  D
                          Closing submission by MR. WOODWARD          30.

                          Closing submission by MR. COLLINS           39.




                  E




                      F




                  G




                  H

J . L. H arpham Ltd
          1




                                                    1




                                    THIRTY-SECONDTH DAY'S PROCEEDINGS
                                        FRIDAY. 14th JULY, 1989

                          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR;  Yes.  Now I have received written
                    submissions from all the represented parties and I would like
                    to thank the Counsel and Solicitors who have prepared those and
                    did so in a short period of time and obviously devoted a great
                B   deal of effort and thought to what they have produced.

                          This morning the opportunity exists for Counsel to add
                    to their written submissions.  I said half~an-hour each;
                    Mr. Hytner said 20 minutes; nobody dissented from that.  If
                    somebody feels that 20 minutes is constricting them too much
                    then I shall not be Americanly strict about it, I shall not
                    stop anybody in the middle of a sentence, but certainly we s all
                    limit the submissions to somewhere between 20 minutes and half-
                    an-hour.
                          I think probably the most sensible course is to proceed
                    in the order in which by and large the cross-examination P^°“
                    ceeded in the oral hearing so it may well be that we should
                    start with you, Mr. Hytner?
                D         MR. COLLINS:  Sir, just before Mr. Hytner, I^am sorry to
                    interrupt, it is just this:  as you are aware we did le^ve °Pen
                    or you did leave open the question of the possibility o j. extra
                    evidence and in fact further statements have come to light in
                    the interval between the conclusion of the evidence and today
                    and we have circulated a number of such statements.

                          Sir, it is our view that although they add glosses and
                E   in certain respects may assist you, for example there are a
                    couple of statements that deal specifically with the collapse
                    of the barrier in Pen 3, none of these statements require the
                    calling of the authors of them to be cross-examined or to give
                    evidence and they can and no doubt will be taken into account
                    as have other statements put in in the course of the Inquiry.

                           As I say they have all been circulated and I think and
                    hope that I can speak for everyone in indicating that that is
                    the position, namely that they will be simply treated as par
                    of the evidence that you will take into account when coming to
                    raake your report.
                           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  Yes, thank you very much, Mr. Collins
                     I believe there have been some statements put in also by other
                     parties, including some I think as recently as this morning.

                           MR. COLLINS:  Yes.  The one this morning I think you are
                     referring to is a document from the South Yorkshire Police.

                           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: Well obviously I have not seen that
                     yet but I will read it in due course.

                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
1




                                                        2


                                MR. COLLINS;  Sir that, as I understand it, I have not
                          really had a chance to read it myself, but my understanding is
                          it contains some information on how other Police Forces deal
                          with the policing of other grounds.

                                I would have thought, with the greatest of respect, that
                          that was perhaps more appropriate for Part 2 of the Inquiry
                          than Part 1, but I have of course no objection to it going in
                  B       at any stage because no doubt you will, whether at Stage 1 or
                          Stage 2, take it into account in any event.

                                LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR;    Yes, thank you, Mr. Collins.

                                MR. WOODWARD;  Sir, you may not be aware that we have
                          been handed further statements this morning ....

                                LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR;    Two I believe, yes.

                                   MR. WOODWARD:   It is more than two sir, a number of
                          statements.      Sir, one understands from the nature of proceedings
                          how this has happened and it may be you have not got those,
                          I d o n 't know?

                                LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  I have not had any statements that
                  D       have only been served this morning by anybody but I will no doubt
                          get them and if anybody wants to refer to them of course I will
                          look at it now, but I am assuming that what Mr. Collins has said
                          is correct, that my invitation a week or two ago to all parties
                          to consider whether there was any other witness they wanted to
                          call actually to give evidence live, that that has been explored
                          and no one has decided they wish to     do   so.
                      E         Right, thank you very   much.   Mr. Hytner?

                                MR. HYTNER:  Sir, may   I first of all explain and if
                          necessary apologise for the   form in which our submissions were
                          put before the Tribunal.

                                LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  I don't think you should do that,
                          Mr. Hytner, I enjoyed reading it.  (Laughter)

                                M R . HYTNER: I think you will appreciate, as the Tribunal
                          will, in the ordinary way client and solicitor are present
                          throughout a hearing and of course the submission is then in
                          shorthand form and I took the opportunity, and I hope you don t
                          mind, of putting a great deal of narrative into our submission
                          which was not really for the Tribunal but helps to explain
                          to the clients and indeed the solicitors who could not be present,
                          what really the submissions were all about and put them in
                          context.
                                Secondly it is perfectly clear from our submissions,
                          which I do not propose to repeat in headline form before the
                          Tribunal today, that no reference has been made to either criminal
                          or civil liability.
                  H

J . L. H arpham Ltd
      It is no secret, and I say this at once, that many of the
bereaved have specifically instructed us that they wish con­
sideration to be given to criminal prosecution or criminal
prosecutions in due course,  but this theyunderstand is not the
time nor the place for that   to be said.

      Similarly they understand, as we do, that this Tribunal
whatever its findings in relation to fault will not find civil
liability in any form.  In fact liability has been denied by
two potential Defendants, the Police and Sheffield Wednesday
Football Club and in the circumstances again I am authorised to
say that proceedings including the service of Statements of
Claim, have already begun against those two bodies so that in
due course civil liability will be determined by a civil Court.

      Thirdly, again it is no secret, it has been referred to
once already by Mr. Jackson, there was at the outset of this
Inquiry a widespread belief   in Liverpool thatthere was going
to be a whitewash or a cover-up.

      Well I have to say immediately there was never a chance
that there was going to be a whitewash or a cover-up.

      I would like to pay tribute first of all to the efforts
of the West Midlands Police because far from there being a
cover-up they have uncovered in our view every single fact
that required to be uncovered and they have done a marvellous
job.
      Secondly the Treasury Team, headed by Mr. Collins, the
solicitors and juniors all deserve tribute paid to them for the
way in which they have analysed and marshalled the evidence
uncovered by the West Midlands Team, so there never was any
chance of a cover-up.
      We would also like to pay tribute to Mr. Collins and his
juniors and the solicitors and the Police for the way in w i c
behind the scenes, and this would not have been apparent to
anyone listening to the evidence, that they have helped us with
the very many enquiries that have come from the bereaved and
the victims and all the problems we had to deal with which have
had to be cleared up and they have helped in all cases with
courtesy and efficiency.

       That having been said, one other thing should be said,
 that no help in uncovering facts was given to the Tribunal
 by very many witnesses of senior rank and status.

       I have read Mr. Jackson's submissions.  In our submission
 it is not just Police witnesses who in relation to this were
 to blame, there were many witnesses other than Police Officers
 whose evidence was given in an unnecessarily defensive and
 evasive fashion and that could have been of no assistance to
 the Tribunal, but there is a further danger and it is t m s i
 if witnesses of high rank and high status, professional men
 and others come before Tribunals being over defensive and
I




                                                   4


                    evasive in answer to questions, again it will simply fuel the
                    belief in the public that Inquiries lead to whitewashes, that
                    people are trying to cover up that which should be uncovered.

                          At the end of the day it is a remarkable tribute, in our
                    submission, to Mr. Collins and his team that after seven weeks
                    of evidence his opening statement should remain completely valid.
                    It must be very rare indeed for an Inquiry Team so to uncover
                B   and analyse evidence, that at the end of the Inquiry really
                    what they have said at the beginning remains basically valid
                    and again we pay tribute to them.

                          Sir, far more important and grave in our submission than
                    the way in which the witnesses gave evidence has been the
                    approach of the South Yorkshire Police in their written sub­
                    missions and this is in contrast, if I may say so, to the
                    dignified manner in which the Club have dealt with the undoubted
                    fact that in April of this year they found themselves as
                    occupiers of dangerous premises.

                          It   is one thing to whine about the efficiency of the
                    Tribunal   in uncovering evidence.   It is one thing to repeat
                    exaggerated allegations against the crowd.     It is one thing
                    in the face of overwhelming evidence that they have been guilty
                D   of a series of blunders to put all the blame on others, but
                    sir it is quite another thing to ignore wholly an admission
                    made by Detective Chief Superintendent Duckenfield that he had
                    committed a very grave blunder and a blunder which we know led
                    directly   to the deaths of 95 people.

                          Not only have they not addressed themselves in any way
                    to that admission, there has been no regret stated at that
                E   blunder and there has been no adoption by them in their final
                    submissions of his admission and no regret even for the lie
                    he admitted telling.

                          You will notice sir in our submissions there is no mention
                    of Chief Superintendent Duckenfield's lie. That was because
                    it was not a cause of the tragedy and he apologised for it,
                    but one might have thought that those in control of the litigation
                    on behalf of the Chief Constable, might have brought themselves
                    to express some slight regret at that mistake and that lie.

                          There are in our submission three dangers arising
                    from the approach of the South Yorkshire Police in making their
                    submissions to this Tribunal.

                G         The first is that if they cannot bring themselves to
                    accept that they have made a single mistake either in the run up
                    to the semi-final or on the day of the semi-final/ then it is
                    inevitable that they will repeat the mistakes that they clearly
                    made and one fears for the future policing of football grounds
                    in their area.

                          The second danger is that the junior ranks of the Force
                H   who also have to give evidence in the Magistrates’ Court or in



J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                     5


                     the Crown Court, may see in the way that their senior Officers
                     gave evidence an example to follow and we can only hope that
                     they will see in Chief Superintendent Nesbit a role model to
                     follow rather than some of the other witnesses who gave evidence,
                     not only I may say a role model for the way he gave evidence,
                     but a role model in the way he behaved on the day of the tragedy.

                 B         The third danger is that the public may say:  "Well of
                     course that is the way the Police always behave".  Sir, it is
                     not the way the Police always behave.  The Police have been
                     represented in this Inquiry by the West Midlands Force who have
                     done such a magnificient job in uncovering the facts; Chief
                     Superintendent Nesbit who I have already mentioned, and the
                     many many junior members of the South Yorkshire Force who both
                     on the day of the tragedy and in the witness box acquitted
                     themselves with a certain degree of distinction and one can
                     only hope and pray that the public do not see in the submissions
                     of the South Yorkshire Police to this Tribunal, in any way an
                     approach which is representative of the Police Forces of this
                     country.
                            It may be - and I close by saying this - it may be that
                     in making these observations about those submissions on behalf
                 D   of the Police I may have been too hard on the Police because
                     those of us who are not laymen, that is not our clients but
                     those of us who know something about litigation, may harbour
                     the unworthy suspicion that possibly the whole approach in
                     those submissions that you have had from the South Yorkshire
                     Police have been dictated not by the Chief Constable, nor by
                     the senior Officers who gave evidence, but have been dictated
                     raore by those who are in control of the litigation and dictated
                     not so much by a desire to assist the Tribunal, but a desire
                     not to pay compensation in due course to the relatives.

                           One can only hope in any event that the approach of the
                     Police in their submissions will not be repeated in due course
                     in the course of the litigation.

                           Sir, may I on behalf of those behind me and all our
                     clients, express our gratitude to you and your colleagues and
                     the Treasury Team, not only for the patience and courtesy
                     with which you have heard us, but also for the care that you
                     have taken to hear the evidence and to absorb it and we can
                     only say that we look forward to the report in due course.

                            LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Thank you, Mr. Hytner.   Mr. Jackson.

                 G          MR. JACKSON:  Sir, may I associate myself and those who
                      instruct me with the remarks made by ray learned friend Mr. Hytne .

                            My Lord, I think everyone will apologise for the form of
                      their submissions.  They are before you.  I d° not wish to
                      repeat them save only to repeat the ^irst line,
                      was wholly avoidable."
                 H

J. L. H arpham Ltd
                                                     6

                            As you indicated at the outset, it would not be the task
                      of this Inquiry to apportion blame.

                            I have sought in my submissions to emphasise, as I under­
                      stood it, the difficulties the Police have in policing such
                      events, taking upon myself the role of advocate for not only
                      the responsible supporters but accepting that there are irrespon­
                      sible supporters and I have indicated in those submissions that
                  B   at a time in the future no doubt, Phase 2 perhaps, the question
                      of the hooligan element will again have to be considered.

                            In   paragraph 5 on page 5 I addressed myself before I had
                      seen the   submissions of the South Yorkshire Police to the matter
                      that has   given my clients more concern than anything that has
                      occurred   since April the 15th.

                            In my submissions I suggested and submitted that the
                      difficulties the Police had in considering crowd control may
                      well have led them to over-emphasise that element in their
                      duties and understandably but regrettably pay rather less
                      attention to crowd safety than was appropriate.

                            I made the observation that there was no suggestion of
                      mal fides merely a misunderstanding and repeated that throughout
                  D   the submissions, but I had in paragraph 6 to say as follows:

                            "Regrettably I cannot make the same concession as
                            to mal fides about the approach of the South Yorkshire
                            Police to the Inquiry.

                            The evidence given by a number of Police Officers
                            as to whether or not they knew or should have known
                            of the clear overcrowding of Pens 3 and 4 was at
                            best less than satisfactory and at worst intended
                            to mislead.

                            Throughout the Inquiry the Police seemed unable to
                            make the slightest concession even when faced with
                            overwhelming evidence • • • •

                      Sir, it is with the greatest regret that I have to completely
                      dissociate myself with the first part of the submissions of
                      the South Yorkshire Police where they suggest that in some way
                      this Inquiry was not fair, proper, thorough and in many ways
                      failed to do that which it set out to do.  I dissociate myself
                      and my instructing solicitors and all the members of the
                      Football Supporters' Association.

                            We have submitted under separate cover submissions as to
                      Phase 1 and Phase 2 as to your recommendations.

                            May I say this sir:  if it is right that the Police of
                      South Yorkshire still feel as the way in which it would seem
                      they feel from my learned friend Mr. Woodward's submissions,
                      you may sir think it is unsafe ever again to attend a football
                      match in South Yorkshire.
                  H

J . L. H arpham Ltd
                                                    7


                          It is quite clear that they have not learnt a single
                    lesson.  It is quite clear they disregard - remember on the
                    last day of the hearing sir, you quite rightly remonstrated
                    with me when I suggested that there was a deliberate disregard
                    of crowd safety and I withdrew that.  Perhaps sir I should not
                    have been quite so quick as to withdraw it.

                B         May I again associate myself with my learned friend
                    Mr. Hytner's submissions, that we are happy that there are
                    Police Forces throughout this land, particularly as we know
                    from this Inquiry in the West Midlands who are concerned with
                    all matters; do realise there are faults on both sides and
                    will work together to make attending football matches safe.
                    I don't think I can assist further.

                          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Thank you, Mr. Jackson.   Mr. Muller.

                           MR. MULLER:  May I please you, sir.  I don|t propose to
                    add anything, you will be glad to know, in relation to our
                    written submissions on behalf of the Fire Service, particularly
                    relating to the advice tendered to the Licensing Authority,
                    namely the Local Authority, as members of a Working Party.

                D         However, I hope I may be permitted in the light of the
                    great deal of adverse publicity and criticism that was given
                    to the Fire Service and in particular to Miss Davies the Fire
                    Control Operator in relation to the calling of the rire Service,
                    I hope I may be permitted to say just a few words.

                          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Yes.

                E        MR. MULLER:   In our written submissions, sir, you will
                    see that we have set out, not for your consumption entirely
                    but also for others who have misread the situation, a detailed
                    chronology of the events immediately surrounding the calling
                    of the Fire Brigade.
                          In our submission a fair consideration of that chronology
                    - and I don't think Mr. Collins would differ from this having
                    read his submission - on a fair reading of that if criticism
                    is to be made at all of anybody, then it would not in our
                    submission be fair to make criticism of Miss Davies or the
                    Fire Service.
                          Sir, we have set out in that document which you have in
                    front of you, which others can also see, on page 3 our comments,
                    in effect our arguments supporting the view that we offer to
                G   you that this was not something which requires criticism, but
                    perhaps I could just stress two points.

                          First of all Miss Davies who is of course a trained
                    person, trained to receive calls from all sorts of different
                    sources, members of the public, all sorts of people at different
                    stages of life and so on, as indeed she has been so trained,
                    was entitled in our submission to expect that when she was
                H   speaking to the Police Headquarters and speaking to a Police



J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                        8


                      Operator, she would obtain precise details from them in relation
                      to this emergency both in the interests of the piompt attendance
                      of the Fire Brigade and an appropriate response by them.

                            Not only was this required by the emergency procedure to
                      which all the emergency services including the Police ware party,
                      but you may think, as one of the Police Officers fairly accepted,
                      it was a matter of commonsense.
                  B
                            Furthermore, on the facts as they have unfolded, it is
                      quite clear that that very information that was being sought
                      was available to the Police having been relayed from Hillsborough,

                            In   the event, as you will have known from the evidence,
                      the Fire   Service provided themselves the name of the road and
                      also the   district where Hillsborough was so that the computer
                      could be   put into action.

                            Mrs. Moodie provided the name of the road,  it is
                      right to say very soon after the Police provided it also, and
                      Miss Davies on her own initiative decided what the district was,
                      namely Ollerton.
                            That is the first point I wish to make and the second one
                  D   I can make very shortly and it is an obvious one but it
                      apparently was not obvious to some people reporting this matter,
                      it is this:   it is quite clear from the fact that the Fl^e
                      Service was only called at 14-minutes-past-3 or shortly before
                      that, that there was never any realistic chance that their
                      attendance at Hillsborough Football Ground could have effected
                      a more speedy release of people who were injured from Pens
                  E   and 4.
                            That of course is not to say, as has been widely acknow­
                      ledged, that the Fire Service when they did attend did not do
                      everything they could by provision of resuscitators and so on,
                      to assist those people who found themselves unfortunately so
                      injured.

                             Sir, that is all I wish to say.

                               LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Thank you, Mr. Muller.   Yes,
                       M r . Murphy.
                             MR. MURPHY:  May I please you sir.  Sir, may I Doin in
                       what my learned friends have already said about the written
                       submissions.
                  G
                             Sir, it is not the intention of the City Council to in
                       any way add to or explore those submissions save perhaps in
                       one respect and that is because my learned friend
                       this morning invited me to consider a remark made on the
                       page of those written submissions.
                             Sir, there is a remark to the effect that a "cautionary
                  H    note has to be. That there are areas of potential knowledge



J . L. H arpham Ltd
                                                         9


                     and information which as far as the City knows has not yet been
                     explored."

                           Sir, that is not meant in any way to be a reflection upon
                     the information before this Inquiry or anything by way of even
                     a modest criticism of the investigation of this event, it is
                     simply to be read in the context of the preceding sentence
                     which is to the effect that this City only took over respon­
                 B   sibility for a licensing function in the mid-1980s and therefore
                     sir it cannot say with absolute certainty what was in the minds
                     of the people who had responsibility prior to that time and
                     really it is as simple as that.

                           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Yes.

                           MR. MURPHY:   Sir, may I say just this by way of general
                     remarks, that there is obviously a danger and I know it is a
                     danger which this Inquiry will be very much alive to, to really
                     examine with the benefit of hindsight an administrative system
                     which was in operation over the years preceding this awful
                     disaster.  Sir, it is with respect very easy to be wise after
                     the event and very easy perhaps to criticise shortcomings with
                     the benefit of hindsight.

                 D         Sir, we would respectfully submit that the involvement
                     of a Licensing Authority such as the Sheffield City Council
                     must been seen very much in the context of what was expected of
                     a Licensing Authority prior to the Hillsborough disaster, and
                     sir that is set out to some extent at least in the Home Office
                     Circular which forms page 423 of the core bundle.

                           There Local Authorities were informed - and this is a
                 E   Home Office Circular dated November 1987 - there Local
                     Authorities were told that:

                           "Whilst it is not intended to restrict the time that
                           Local Authorities may feel should be devoted to the
                           task of inspections, it should not result in signi­
                           ficant resources ....

                           The scope of inspections under paragraphs 3 and 4
                           of the statutory guidance together with associated
                           report work, are not intended to be as detailed or
                           extensive as that often required of the holder of
                           a Safety Certificate or that which may sometimes be
                           necessary prior to the issue of a Safety Certificate.

                            In general inspections are not expected to take more
                            than about two man days per ground on average."

                      Sir, may I say this:  as far as Sheffield City Council were
                      concerned, vastly more than two man days were expended on
                      inspections and on all the associated procedures which covered
                      the safety of sportsgrounds in this area.

                            Sir, the Council, Sheffield City Council is very much
                 H    committed to sport, to leisure and to encouraging safety in



J. L. H arpham Ltd
                                                         10


                        sport, and sir it will perhaps be known to you and to the Inquiry
                        but it is very well known to those of us who live in Sheffield,
                        that in 1991 Sheffield is to be the first British City to host
                        the World Student Games.

                              LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Yes, well we have seen it all going
                        up,
                B             MR. MURPHY:  Sir yes, with respect one could not miss it
                        in this City at the moment.  Sir, those games are the biggest
                        multi-sport event outside the Olympic Gaines, and as I say
                        Sheffield is the first City in Britain to host those games and
                        up to one-and-a-half million visitors are expected in Sheffield.

                               Sir, there is an extensive programme of building which you
                        have already referred to; new stadiums, arenas, vast sports
                        facilities are being constructed in this City.   Sir, they are
                        being constructed, I am told, with the benefit of consultation of
                        those who will use them, those that will visit them.   Spectators,
                        fans are being consulted.

                              Sir, this City Council, indeed like most City Councils
                        and most Authorities in this country will learn from this Inquiry.
                D       This City Council will take note of what this Inquiry recommends
                        and indeed has already done that.

                              May I say this:  already steps have been made to contact
                        the Ambulance Authority with a view to involving them in the
                        licensing and certification duties of the City Council.
                        Procedures will be modified and improved in the light of this
                        Inquiry's report.
                    E
                              Sir, I said at the very outset of this Inquiry on behalf
                        of the City Council that it was our intention to assist and
                        not our intention in any way to cover up what might have
                        happened.  I hope that we have done this.

                              May I say finally, sir, and this is again upon express
                        instructions and it is perhaps using the opportunity of this
                        final address to say this, that of. Course I represent today
                        the Sheffield City Council and the Council in turn represents
                        the people of Sheffield, and sir we recognise and sympathise
                        with the tremendous loss and sense of anguish that the people
                        of Liverpool have experienced as a result of this dreadful
                        traqedy, and sir I would like to take this opportunity on
                        behalf of the people of Sheffield to extend the deepest sympathy
                        of the Sheffield City Council to the people of Liverpool and
                        may I say this also, that the City of Sheffield and the people
                        of Sheffield were indeed traumatised by what happened on that
                        day in April and sir this awful tragedy will never be forgotten
                        in Sheffield.
                               LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Thank you, Mr. Murphy.

                               Can I just ask you, purely on a question of accuracy.
                H        Page 15 of your submission.  I don't think the penultimate



J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                      11


                     paragraph is right, is it?   It does not seem to take account
                     of the fact that those terraces, the 23 turnstiles were also
                     intended to let in the whole of the North Stand which rather
                     alters the figures, doesn't it?

                            MR. MURPHY:   Some of the North Stand, yes sir.

                 B          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   All of the North Stand.

                           MR. MURPHY:  Yes, the North Stand were also, as I understand
                     it, being allowed in from the turnstiles at the Spion Kop end.

                           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    No, no, not on that day, that was
                     segregation.

                           MR. MURPHY:  Sir yes, but generally speaking that is the
                     means of entrance to the North Stand.

                            LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Oh I appreciate that, but on this
                     day?

                            MR. MURPHY:   Yes, of course.

                 D          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Thank you very much.   Yes Mr. Dyson?

                           MR. DYSON:  Sir, may I start by saying - I won^t be very
                     long - may I start by saying that the Football Association
                     accepts as being entirely fair and justified the way in which
                     Mr. Collins in his observations has dealt with the proceedings
                     as affects the Football Association.  We think that Mr. Collins'
                     summary and approach is entirely balanced and fair and we don't
                 E   merely say that because it more or less coincides with the way
                     we have sought to put it in our submissions, but it does seem
                     to us that that is a fair and balanced assessment of the case
                     so far as it concerns the F .A.

                           In our own submissions, sir, you will probably have seen
                     that we said that we understood it to be generally accepted
                     that the Football Association's choice of Hillsborough as the
                     ground to stage the semi-final was not causative of the disaster.
                     That was our understanding of the general belief and under­
                     standing of all concerned in these proceedings.

                           If that   expectation had been borne out by events I would
                     have sat down   at this moment. We almost got it right but
                     unfortunately   not quite and it is because we did not quite get
                     it right that   I have to go on and say a few things.

                           We completely failed to foresee that Mr. Hytner's sub­
                     missions, his long submission would contain at its very end a
                     sting in the tail so far as the F.A. is concerned.

                           Vie knew that the bereaved and injured had blamed and
                     understandably blamed the Football Association because the
                     choice of Hillsborough meant that Liverpool were allocated some
                 H   approximately 4,000 fewer tickets than Nottingham Forest and
                     that had always been understood to be a complaint.


J. L. H arpham Ltd
                                                   12


                          What nobody in my submission could have foreseen was that
                    it should now be alleged for the very first time some 10 days
                    or so after the close of the oral part of the case, that the
                    Football Association was at fault in choosing Hillsborough as
                    the ground because Hillsborough was an "inherently unsafe and
                    unsuitable ground to stage the match" and that that choice was
                    causative of the disaster, but that surprisingly is what
                B   Mr. Hytner seeks to say in his submission and sir you will
                    have seen that it is at pages 65, 69 and Appendix V at the very
                    end.

                          We confess to surprise.  In our submission the allegation
                    is wholly unjustified and ill-founded and we would venture to
                    suggest that Mr. Hytner himself must have thought that during
                    the hearing because he never once suggested to any of the
                    Football Association witnesses that the F.A. was at fault in
                    any of the respects now alleged and we are all of course very
                    conscious and have always been very conscious of the line which
                    you adopted sir, that this is not a case in which any points
                    would necessarily be taken about matters not being put, but
                    nevertheless if this had been a live matter one would have
                    certainly expected it to be put.

                D         A lengthy answer to this new allegation is not called for
                    and I don't propose to make it.  The short answer is sir, and
                    I think you are well aware of this because it was touched upon
                    by the F.A. witnesses in the evidence, the short answer is
                    that the Football Association does not and never has made
                    detailed checks on the safety of grounds, nor has it made
                    detailed checks on the manner in which the Clubs and the Police
                    ensure that overcrowding is avoided.
                E
                          Everybody knows and accepts and always has, that the F.A.
                    relies upon the Licensing Authority to issue Safety Certificates
                    and to ensure that their terms are complied with.  Everybody
                    knows and accepts that the F.A. relies upon the Police and the
                    Clubs to perform their roles properly and in our submission
                    that is an entirely reasonable attitude for the F.A. to adopt.

                          Sir, may I very briefly remind you of one or two passages
                    in Mr. Kelly's evidence when he was in fact being cross-examined
                    by my learned friend Mr. Hytner.  The references, and I can
                    give them to you, are Day 25 between pages 65 and 69. What
                    Mr. Hytner did was to ask Mr. Kelly a number of hypothetical
                    questions and you may remember that he was asked some rather
                    long and complicated hypothetical questions about what Mr. Kelly
                    would have done had he known that there were not separate turn­
                    stiles linked to self-contained pens and Mr. Kelly refused to
                    answer the hypothetical question and indeed in the context of
                    that line of cross-examination Mr. Hytner said, this is at
                    65H:

                          "I am not at the moment attacking you.   I am asking
                          you a hypothetical question."

                H   Mr, Kelly was reluctant to answer the hypothetical question and


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                     13


                     it all culminated in the important answers given by Mr. Kelly
                     at between 67C and 68B when Mr. Kelly said this.  He said:

                           "I don't think the Football Association have ever
                           set themselves up as safety experts, my Lord, in
                           any of these questions and Mr. Hytner could ask me
                           the question about any aspect of the Green Guide
                 R         and I would have difficulty in saying precisely
                           what the F.A. would have done."

                     Then sir you said:

                           "Does it come to this, Mr. Kelly, that if the F.A.
                           had not set themselves up as officers of safety,
                           in effect, that you trust to the safety certificate
                           procedure so far as safety is concerned, and safety is
                           not a factor, outside that, that you would take into
                           account?"

                     The answer:

                           "No, I don't think we would."

                 D   Question:

                           "Do you agree with me?"

                     Answer:

                           "Yes."

                 E   My learned friend Mr. Hytner did not go on to challenge the
                     wisdom of that approach but continued with a number of further
                     hypothetical questions which go on for the next two pages
                     about what would Mr. Kelly have done had he known for example
                     that the perimeter fence gates did not conform and what would
                     he have done if he had known there was a complete breakdown
                     of communication between Stewards and Police.

                           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Well he said it would be a cause
                     for concern.
                           MR. DYSON: Well hardly surprising that he said that if
                     he had known, but that was the limit of the extent to which
                     Mr. Hytner cross-examined Mr. Kelly on an area where one would
                     have expected if this was a serious criticism, the criticism
                     would have been pursued, but it wasn't.  It was never suggested
                     by Mr. Hytner that the F.A. was at fault in failing to make
                     detailed inspections of the stadiums and we suggest that it
                     must have been accepted by him, and rightly accepted, that the
                     F.A. was reasonably entitled to rely upon the Licensing Authority,
                     the Club and the Police.

                           It does not even stop there because when we came to
                     Mr. Evans who was treated by a number of Counsel as a quasi­
                 H   expert as you will remember, Mr. Evans was also asked some



J . L. Harpham Ltd
                                                    14


                     questions and again very briefly if I can give you the references
                     to that, Day 26 at page 1 starting at letter E and going over
                     to page 2 at letter A. This is when he was being examined by
                     Mr. Goldsack.  Mr. Evans gave as it were his remit and his
                     terms of reference.  He was asked the question:

                           "Do you regard it as any part of your brief to report
                           on safety matters as they affect the crowd and crowd
                 B         movements?"

                     The answer:
                           "No, because the Safety Certificate is in existence
                           and I don't carry out an audit of the Safety Certificate
                           arrangements."

                     When he came to be cross-examined by Mr. Hytner at page 15H to
                     16A, again at 19E to G, Mr. Hytner said in terms, at the very
                     bottom of page 15 he said:

                           "I just want to deal now with two specific matters
                           that arise from your inspection because I am not
                           suggesting that you should have made a more detailed
                           inspection."
                 D
                     He was specifically there disavowing any intention of suggesting
                     that a more detailed inspection should have been made.  Hardly^
                     consistent with what one now finds in Appendix V of Mr. Hytner s
                     submissions.

                           At 19 where Mr. Hytner was asking Mr. Evans about monitoring
                 E   he said:
                            "Were you in 1988 aware that there was no provision
                            for monitoring the safety capacity in each individual
                            pen?"

                     Answer:

                            "I wasn't aware of that."

                      Question:
                            "Had you been aware of it, would it have been a matter
                            which you would have thought necessary to report to
                            the F.A?"

                      Answer:
                            "No. To be honest, I don't know whether that
                            computer-controlled VDU did show the numbers going
                            through into each pen, if you are telling me that tha
                            is so.  But, for the reasons I have stated, it would
                            not be a matter that I would feel obliged to report
                            to the F.A."
                 H

J . L. Harpham Ltd
                                                    15


                     Then Mr. Hytner says this:

                           "You see, I am not suggesting for a moment, Mr. Evans,
                           that you failed in your duty by failing to find this
                           fact out.  Do you follow?"

                     And then one compares that with again Appendix V. There has
                 B   been a complete about-turn.  It is not merely that the point
                     was not put, but the whole of the style and approach of the cross-
                     examination was consistent only with an acceptance by Mr. Hytner
                     that there was absolutely nothing in these points, so we say
                     that his thoughts and approach as evidenced during the hearing
                     of the evidence were in this respect sound and infinitely to be
                     preferred to the criticisms which from our point of view were
                     as unexpected as we say they are misconceived.

                           Sir, the only other matter I wish to say is this:  so far
                     as the Police are concerned you will see that in our submissions
                     we have made a number of observations about the Police but
                     really substantially in order to set the scene for the interim
                     recommendations which we have put for your consideration, but
                     so far as the Police are concerned we do not substantially
                     differ from the observations that Mr. Hytner has summarised this
                 D   morning but, and it is an important but, we would certainly
                     wish to remind everybody of the debt which is owed by football,
                     and speaking on behalf of the F.A. we are very conscious of
                     this, of the enormous debt owed by football to Police throughout
                     the country for the unenviable and very difficult task they
                     perform week in week out, year in year out.  It is a point which
                     we have made in our written submissions but I repeat it today
                     because it is one which we feel cannot be emphasised too much,
                 E   whatever happened on the 15th of April of this year.

                           Finally, sir, we would like to express our gratitude to
                     you and your colleagues for the patience and fairness which you
                     have shown in the conduct of these proceedings and to add our
                     gratitude to Mr. Collins and to his team for their fairness and
                     their enormous co-operation from which we have all benefited
                     throughout the proceedings.  Thank you very much.

                           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Thank you, Mr. Dyson.   Yes,
                     Mr. Kallipetis.

                           MR. KALLIPETIS:  May I please you, sir. During the 31
                     days that I have sat here on behalf of the Ambulance Service,
                     it appears to me that there are six characteristics of a major
                     disaster.
                           The   first is that everyone says it should never have
                     happened.
                           The second is that all those responsible for it happening
                     will say it was somebody else's fault.

                           The third characteristic, everyone refers to hindsight
                 H   when what was required was a bit of foresight.



J. L. H arpham Ltd
                                                      16

                          Fourthly there will be a Public inquiry.

                           Fifthly everyone expressed the hope that it will never
                     happen again and sixthly, alas, it will happen again.

                           At the risk of tempting providence, may I say that I would
                     hope that an Inquiry of this eminence presided over by a Lord
                     Justice with the assistance of a Chief Constable and an eminent
                 B   Professor; ten Queen's Counsel; numerous junior Counsel; assisted
                     by a team of Officers from the West Midlands ranging from a
                     Chief Constable down to an Officer, if we can't get it right
                     then this is a problem which is indeed insoluble.

                           Because of the eminence of this Inquiry, because of the
                     fact that everyone, and I mean everyone, we all. know has worked
                     extraordinary hours to make sure that this Inquiry was completed
                     within a very short space of time, may I say on behalf of t
                     Ambulance Service we deplore any suggestion that this Inquiry
                     was not "thorough or complete".

                           Inevitably because we are all human it is not perfect,
                     but we sincerely express the hope that we have got it as right
                     as anyone could have done.

                 D         We also deplore the suggestions that the Inquiry has
                     allowed advocates a licence to indulge in leading questions;
                     to elicit hearsay and invite speculation. We are well aware,
                     if some aren't, that this Inquiry and this Tribunal has more
                     than others, been able to sift and base its conclusions on
                     reliable evidence and logical conclusion and proper inferen  .

                            We would observe that perhaps those who complain the
                 E   loudest about the way that this Tribunal has been conducted
                     might thank their lucky stars that had the Indians been called
                     before the Chiefs, the Chiefs might have undergone a much more
                     unpleasant time in view of the evidence that was subsequently
                     heard.
                            May I say that I would like to add a few balloons to
                      the bouquet of thank yous that Mr. Hytner has already extended.

                            We came late to the Inquiry and we have been very grate­
                      ful indeed for the assistance we have received from everybody.
                      I have no need to list them all because they have already been
                      listed.  I merely associate myself and those who instruct me
                      with the thanks for the assistance we have received.

                            perhaps I should apologise for being a pest to the West
                      Midlands Police in terms of transcripts, tape ^ P j d i n g s <aJd
                      videos and transcripts upon transcripts because p i o u s l y I
                      had nothing else to do at night but to listen to tapes
                      nobody else had bothered with.
                            No one in their written submissions has made any
                      criticism of SYMAS and I would respectfully su9gest on behalf
                      of my clients that is because none could properly be made.
                 H    IhoSId t h « e be any to come may X sir perhaps reserve my



J . L. Harpham Ltd
                                                    17


                     position in case you feel I need to answer any that may be made
                     publicly which have not been made in writing?

                           Sir, you have my submissions.  If there is any matter
                     there that you require further argument on I should be happy
                     to give it, otherwise I stand by them.

                           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  The only thing, page 26,
                 B   Mr. Kallipetis, your closely reasoned argument as to the gate.
                     We are on Gate A by then and Sergeant Higgins.  You say:
                     "No evidence as to when this request was made."  But there was
                     evidence from him which was the basis of Mr. Collins' assertion
                     that you quote I think at the beginning of that passage on 25,
                     that it was 2.58 when that gate was opened and that isn't very
                     long away from the time when this call was made at 2.59.

                           MR. KALLIPETIS:  I appreciate that sir and you will of
                     course appreciate the argument that I put forward to say that
                     in spite of that coincidence of time, we submit that it could
                     not have been Gate A which Sergeant Waugh overheard which caused
                     him to make the 'phone call which he did, but I am more con­
                     cerned because of the way that the evidence was put by South
                     Yorkshire Police, to dissuade you from any belief that it was
                 D   the request to open Gate C which occasioned an emergency phone
                     call some nine minutes later.

                           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  But really your argument is con­
                     cerned with showing that the impetus for the query about the
                     ambulances came from the perimeter fence?

                           MR. KALLIPETIS:   Indeed sir, yes.
                 E                                But in the end does it matter where
                           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:
                     it came from, if it came?

                           MR. KALLIPETIS:  Sir, we would merely say this:  had the
                     people on the perimeter fence who clearly recognised what was
                     happening, if they could see it we fail to understand why those
                     in command could not see it.  Had they have appreciated, as
                     their junior Officers did what was happening and had a proper
                     request been made for ambulance help, and by that I don't mean
                     a criticism of the Officer who says:  "We want a fleet of
                     ambulances" because that is the way he sees it, but as the
                     Police accepted, if somebody goes into a Police Station and says
                     "Send all your Policemen down to the ground" one would not do
                     it, but if a Chief Superintendent gets on the 'phone and says:
                     "Look, we have got a major disaster, send everything you have
                     got" everybody moves.

                           I don't think in the event it made any difference, but I
                     do say of all the arguments that have been advanced about
                     saving lives, that is the only one that could possibly have
                     any justification and that is had we been called at one-minute-
                     to—three then we might have been able to do something but in
                     the circumstances and bearing in mind the medical evidence
                 H   that four minutes was really the critical time, then I fear
                     that the tragedy had already dealt its blow long before anybody
                     could have realised what was happening.

J. L. H arpham Ltd
                                                    18



                           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Yes, thank you.   Yes, Mr. Glasgow.

                            MR. GLASGOW:  Sir, the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
                      asked to be represented in front of your Inquiry for three
                      reasons.

                            Firstly we wanted genuinely to provide you with as much
                  B   information and assistance as we could.

                            Secondly we were concerned that some of the accounts
                      which appeared to have been given by people in the early stages
                      were less than candid, and thirdly, we honestly believedthat
                      some of the earlier criticisms which had been made of the Club
                      were ill-founded and unfair.

                            The first of those reasons was and is by far the most
                      important, as we hope has been apparent from the way in which
                      we and our witnesses have conducted ourselves and from the
                      assistance and information that we have attempted to provide
                      behind the scenes.   We have done our best to keep the second
                      two motives in proportion and balanced.

                            By far the most important matter we believe and we always
                  D   did believe, was that your Inquiry should truthfully if not
                      legalistically get to the bottom of what happened in fairness
                      for those who had been involved and secondly that it should
                      ensure insofar as was humanly possible, that such a tragedy
                      could never happen again out of respect for those who died,
                      and we believe the respect of those who disagree with us, we
                      still sincerely believe that that objective has been achieved
                      and the second part will be achieved.
                  E
                            It is a fact that this Football Club was and is proud
                      of its reputation, the reputation for what it had done parti­
                      cularly at its ground.

                            In saying that we wholly understand the criticisms which
                      have been made upon it and we have dealt with that both in the
                      evidence and in the submissions which we do not seek to add
                      to.
                            Insofar as those criticisms may be unjustified they will
                      be vigorously defended elsewhere, but it would be inappropriate
                      and unreasonable to attempt to do that before you.

                            Perhaps the only aspect of that that matters before you,
                      sir, is that it is one of the tragic ironies of this case
                      that an appalling disaster of this kind did as a matter of fact
                      occur at a ground of which every single person who has spoke
                      had a high regard.
                            We mention that as a matter of fact because it is important
                      that those who are less well able to afford things than we are
                      and who are less well equipped than we are should learn by
                      the mistakes that have been made.
                  H

J . L. H arpham Ltd
                                                         19


                                So far as the ground itself is concerned, may I just
                          make one observation which did not seem appropriate to put in
                          our submissions.

                                I think it is probably right to say that every single
                          person in this room has visited the ground on at least one
                          occasion and you and your colleagues on a number, more than
                          that.
                  B
                                I venture to suggest that nobody who visited that ground
                          at least on the first occasion, could have failed to be moved
                          by the tragic sight of the Leppings Lane terrace preserved as
                          they had to be, in the state in which they were found after
                          the disaster had occurred.

                                It may not have occurred to anybody else who has not
                          spent as much time with the staff and Officers as we have,
                          that the Club, its Officers, its players and its staff have
                          lived for the 13 weeks and worked with that tragic and physical
                          reminder in front of them every single day of their working
                          lives ever since and when they say, as they said through me
                          in the early stages, that they have sympathy for the families
                          of those who died and suffered, that is something which is
                          felt with very great sincerity because it should also not be
                  D       overlooked that every single person who works and plays at that
                          Club has one common bond, and that is a genuine enthusiasm
                          for this game and they above anybody else feel the sympathy
                          for the supporters, the fans and their families more genuinely
                          and more acutely than anybody else could.

                                We only say that because at one stage it was suggested
                          that this Club and perhaps others had no feelings or no
                      E   sympathy or no understanding for the needs or the accommodation
                          and comfort of its supporters and fans and that is something
                          which we would resent, as we hope our conduct has shown.

                                So far as the Police are concerned may we just say this:
                          we understand why others have been as critical as they have.
                          We too have criticised where we inevitably felt driven to it
                          by some of the suggestions that were made, but we would earnestly
                          hope that those criticisms both from us and from others should
                          be seen against the background of the very sincere admiration
                          that those of our Officers who have actually worked beside the
                          Police have for the job that this Force have done, quite apart
                          from any others, physically on the ground to help in the running
                          of that Club and to do what they have believed was necessary,
                          although that clearly does not detract from the criticisms that
                          are justifiably made today.

                                 So far as your Inquiry is concerned, sir, may we put °n e »
                           it is pointless adding to all the admiration that has already
                           been expressed although you know it is sincerely felt by us all.

                                 There is one little sideline that might make us all
                           slightly more proud on a happy day than we would otherwise be,
                  H        I don't imagine that Soviet sport is compulsory reading yet in
                           the Royal Courts of Justice, but if you happened to notice it


J . L. H arpham Ltd
                                                        20


                      you would have seen the report, and of course the reliability
                      of it one has always got to be conscious, a question mark
                      hanging over, although doubtless published in English it was
                      sincere, but it does appear that some 342 Soviet citizens
                      died in an accident remarkably similar to this before the
                      Hillsborough Inquiry occurred, and in the time it has taken
                      you to get to the bottom of this with the active and vigorous
                      co-operation of pretty well everybody concerned, the only
                  B   progress that was made in respect of those 342 deaths were
                      that they were leaked to Press outside the country where they
                      occurred.

                            That is the reason why, although it may seem odd coming
                      from us, we take very real pride in having been allowed to
                      co-operate and participate in the Inquiry which you have held
                      which has achieved so much so quickly and we believe so fairly.

                            Before sitting down may we if no one else pay tribute
                      sir to the staff here who have otherwise gone wholly unnoticed.
                      We simply moved into this building and substantially took it
                      over. We have been treated with such extraordinary friendship
                      and courtesy by every person who works in this building that
                      I fear some may have thought we took them for granted, and the
                      ladies who make the tea behind us, to Mr. Poole with his pointer
                  D   and all the other staff of this City to whom we have a very real
                      debt, the weeks would have been even more difficult had we not
                      had their kindness.

                            LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  I entirely concur with what you
                      have said, and indeed with that in mind before we parted a
                      fortnight ago I asked that all the staff should gather and I
                      spoke to them and thanked them, but I repeat it and I am glad
                  E   that the Bar join in with those sentiments.

                            MR. GLASGOW:   We would like to.      Thank you.

                            LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  Just on one point of information
                      before you sit down, could you or your Junior if not off-the-
                      cuff before we leave today, tell me when the electronic counting
                      system at the turnstiles was introduced?

                            MR. GLASGOW:   Yes, 1986.    I will give you an exact date
                      sir, if I may.
                            LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  And was the monitoring eye in each
                      turnstile introduced at the same time or later?

                            MR. GLASGOW:   It will be more reliable if I give you ---

                            LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   If you could let me have on a piece
                      of paper, thank you.

                            MR. GLASGOW:   I will sir.       Thank you.

                             MR. DYSON:  Sir, I wonder whether I could very briefly
                       interject because Mr. Hytner says I have misunderstood his
                  H

J . L. H arpham Ltd
                                                     21


                      approach in relation to one of the matters I was submitting to^
                      you.  I would not for one moment wish for such a misunderstanding
                      to continue for any longer than is absolutely necessary.

                            It was in relation to what he was putting to Mr. Evans
                      and he has asked me to clarify what he was putting to Mr. Evans
                      was that it was not Mr. Evans' duty to make a detailed inspection
                      and that is all that he was accepting with Mr. Evans.
                  B
                            It does not detract from the point I was seeking to make
                      which is very odd if Mr. Hytner is now making this fundamental
                      and serious allegation that when he is cross-examining one of
                      the witnesses who did inspect, that very far from saying:  "Well
                      shouldn't that have been a detailed inspection?" he says:   Well
                      I am not criticising you for not making them."

                            LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  My note of that is that the witness
                      said:  "My remit is to record general impressions of crowd
                      behaviour.  It is not my remit to comment on the suitability
                      of the ground for a semi-final."

                            MR. DYSON:  Sir, and on that point as a matter simply of
                      correcting an error, one of the few errors I have been a^ e to
                      find in Mr. Glasgow's masterly submission, at page 7 he does
                  D   fall into error by saying that "the sole purpose of Mr. Evans
                      was to assess the suitability of the ground for the staging of
                      the semi-final."  That is plainly wrong.

                            Sir, I am grateful.

                            LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Mr. Toulson.
                  E         MR. TOULSON:  Sir, Dr. Eastwood, m y instructing solicitors
                      and I have no complaint about the way in which this Inquiry
                      has been conducted.
                            We understand the reasons which led to Dr. Eastwood
                      receiving a Salmon letter at a late stage of the hearing and
                      his becoming a party.  Public interest must rightly take
                      precedence over private convenience in these matters.

                            The questioning of Dr. Eastwood was tough and vigorous
                      but so it should be.     He has been    treated fairlyand courteousl
                      and no complaints are made.
                             On the contrary, having been thrown in at the deep end
                       at a late stage we are grateful for the help and consideration
                       that has been received.
                             Sir, it will be appreciated that Dr. Eastwood had provided
                       a full and detailed statement at an early stage. A conscious
                       decision was taken to   exhibit that statement, documents which
                       could give rise to criticism of him and in the         have»
                       internal memoranda relating to capacity and the like.

                             Equally a conscious attempt was made to tell the history
                  H    of the barriers in a way that all could understand so that


J . L. H arpham Ltd
                                                        22



                      such criticism as might properly be raised could be raised.
                      It was intended there should be openness because the public
                      and the Inquiry were entitled to a full account of what his
                      firm had done.

                            It will also be appreciated, sir, that although that
                      statement had been prepared in detail, the service of the Salmon
                  B   letter at the very late stage that it came shortly before
                      Dr. Eastwood was to give evidence, did necessitate an immense
                      amount of work in preparing for the three days in the event
                      that he spent being cross-examined about a variety of matters
                      far outside the confines of the Salmon letter, quite rightly,
                      going over the span of a decade, a decade of course when he
                      was a busy professional man, and sir those are, as I reiterate,
                      not matters of complaint but matters which I know you will have
                      in mind when evaluating his evidence.

                            It would not be expected that he would have a complete
                      and ready answer to every point.  He was I believe the party
                      who not only joined last but was in the witness box for longest,
                      something over 12 hours.
                            Sir, my written submissions you have.      I would like just
                  D   to amplify if I may on certain live points.

                            In the introduction on page 2 I sought to identify the
                      heads under which I apprehended criticisms came.   In the
                      event the criticisms which are made in the closing submissions
                      of other parties all come under III and they come down to
                      three points.
                  E         Point 1, in relation to penning there is a broader and
                      a narrower criticism.  The broader criticism from Mr. Hytner
                      is that penning was only ever viable if you had separate
                      turnstiles controlling ....
                            LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  Sorry, I am not following you.  You
                      are looking at your I-V on page 2 and you say the only matter
                      of criticism is III?
                            MR. TOULSON:  Yes, three criticisms are made in the
                      closing submissions of other parties which ....

                             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     I see.   Sorry, I thought you meant
                       number III?
                             MR. TOULSON: No. They all come under my rubric III,
                       they all relate to the arrangement of crush barriers.
                       That is as I read the criticisms in the closing submissions
                       of the other parties.
                             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  As I understand it there is a
                       suggestion too that Dr. Eastwood ought to have been more active
                       in pursuing V?
                  H          mr   . TOULSON:   That does not I think emerge, that is not



J . L. H arpham Ltd
                                                         23


                          how I read the closing submissions but I may be wrong.

                                The points which I gleaned from the closing submissions,
                          just to identify them were these:  in relation to the whole
                          subject of penning the broad criticism advanced by Mr. Hytner
                          is that penning was only ever viable if you had separate
                          turnstiles providing computerised counting control into each
                  B       pen.

                                The narrower criticism, may I call it lb of Mr. Collins,
                          is that penning without separate turnstiles was viable provided
                          there was proper observation and monitoring, but Dr. Eastwood
                          failed to bring home the necessity of that sufficiently to the
                          Club or the Police.

                                The other two criticisms I listed from the end closing
                          submissions go from the general to the particular and they
                          relate Item 2 to the spacing of the barriers and Item 3 to
                          the removal of Barrier 144.  It may well be that that, I have
                          read too narrowly and the third point in particular rolls on to
                          the question of the linked consideration of capacity.

                                May I pass on to the next section of the submissions:
                  D       "The role of Eastwood and Partners".   I merely add this:  no
                          attempt is made to pass the buck for what was Dr. Eastwood's
                          proper responsibility.   They were Structural Engineers responsible
                          for the structural     design of parts of the ground and for
                          advising in relation to that and that involves, of course,
                          taking operational conditions into account.

                                They were not responsible for the operational control
                      E   of the ground.  They take their instructions from the Club and
                          whilst they owe a duty to the public their primary duty is to
                          the Club.  They owe a duty to both the Club and the public.
                          They are not the engineers to the Licensing Authority.

                                I make the point in paragraph 6 and I come back to it
                          in the light of something in Mr. Hytner's submissions, that
                          the Licensing Authority looked for advice on engineering matters
                          from its own engineer.

                                It is suggested in Mr. Hytner's closing submissions, not
                          in the Local Authority's, that Mr. Bownes looked or relied for
                          expert advice on structural matters from Dr. Eastwood and that
                          was not Mr. Bownes' evidence.

                                I referred at the foot of 6 to the relevant passages of
                          Mr. Bownes' evidence and they are there sir for you to read.
                          They make good the submission.

                                The engineer who was on the Working Party was Mr. Don
                          Sheriff.   He is a fellow of the Institution of Structural
                          Engineers.   I have the handbook here.  It is the highest
                          rank of membership of the Institution and he was present if
                          one goes through the minuted meetings of the Working Party,
                  H       at 13 out of 15 of them and Deputies were present on the other
                          occasions.

J . L. H arpham Ltd
                                                    24



                               Now this is not a criticism of Mr. Collins or anybody
                         else, it is a fact that there is no statement from Mr. Sheriff,
                         nor has he given evidence, and whereas Dr. Eastwood the Club's
                         Engineer has given a very full account of matters you have
                         not heard from the Licensing Authority's Engineer and we are
                         in this position, that heavy criticism is made of Dr. Eastwood
                         for in effect failing to stand out against decisions of the
                         Working Party, particularly in relation to Barrier 144, when
                 B       no questions have been put to, let alone criticisms made of,
                         the Structural Engineer member of that Working Party whose
                         decisions it is said the Club's Engineer ought to have held
                         out against.

                                May I just add a couple of other observations in relation
                         to Dr. Eastwood.   I doubt whether anybody could give their
                         evidence honestly without being in some degree tinged by hind­
                         sight.   He would be a remarkable man who claimed it, but it is
                         my submission that Dr. Eastwood was a witness of integrity
                         and should be accepted as such.

                               Besides his openness in the approach to which I have
                         already referred in placing material before the Tribunal, he
                         made unequivocal concessions where there was error with no
                         attempt to beat about the bush.
                 D
                               I could cite various examples.  One you will have in
                         mind is the fact that when the testing of the barriers was
                         done one section, the end section of each leg, or end leg of
                         each section was loaded but the result not recorded.  He was
                         offered the opportunity of saying, indeed you sir put a question
                         to him:  "Well do you say that you nevertheless did a represen­
                         tative proportion?" and his response to that at once was:  "No,
                     E   I don't.  That was an error".  One could multiply the examples.

                               Now it is said that on certain matters his evidence should
                         not be accepted, either because it is not confirmed by members
                         of tteWorking Party when he says certain things were discussed,
                         or because it is not minuted.

                               As to Point 1 that might be a more telling point if
                         other members of the Working Party had been called and asked
                         about the point, but it adds nothing to the effect if they
                         are not.

                               As to the second point, not minuted, you sir will have
                         seen the form of the minutes taken by Mr. Vaughn.  After the
                         Sheffield City Council took over of course there were no
                         minutes.  Mr. Vaughn's minutes take the form of recording
                         decisions, recording actions to be taken.  They do not take
                         the form of that kind of conference note or attendance note
                         where the individual contributions of each person are noted.

                               Discussions there were.  One has the minuted Working
                         Party which approved the introduction of radials in 1981,
                         not of course attended by Dr. Eastwood, but it refers simply
                 H       to the fact that the pros and cons were weighed.  It was



J. L. H arpham Ltd
                                                      25


                      recognised to be disadvantaged but .... The details of discussion
                      are not gone into, so you have the point.

                            May I shortly take those live points.  The penning system,
                      the assertion that it was never viable unless you had separate
                      turnstiling.  That is not the approach of the Green Guide.

                            Sir, you will be well familiar with paragraph 206 in the
                  B   '86 Guide which favours and recommends radial fences and goes
                      on to say:

                            "Ideally each should be self-contained, served by
                            its own entrance and exits, refreshment facilities
                            and toilets."

                      Those are not just optional bits the refreshment and toilets
                      because if you have wholly segregated but no toilets, what happens
                      when someone wants to go to the lavatory?

                            The ideal is fully segregated but it clearly recognises
                      that you may have penning without that full segregation.  If
                      you are going to have penning without that full segregation
                      the only way it is going to be done is by observation and watching.

                  D         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  I suppose you can count people in
                      at the mouth of the pen and still have a communal concourse
                      behind, can't you?
                            MR. TOULSON:  I don't know. We weren't present when the
                      Police who gave evidence about the way they actually policed
                      the ground went into it.  It might be possible, but the point
                      I am seeking to make is this:  the proposition is a wholly
                  E   unviable idea, that it should be either the whole thing or not
                      at all, either open plan or total segregation, but penning
                      without total segregation is not the line of the Green Guide
                      which recommends radial penning even if you are not having the
                      total segregation.
                            The second point is of course that it was the view, for
                      reasons whichhe has advanced of Dr. Eastwood, that this was
                      viable provided that degree of control was exercised.

                            The third is that that was the view of all the members
                      of the Working Party.
                            The fourth is that it in fact worked in practice in the
                      manner described by Inspector Calvert, by Mr. L o c k .   There were
                      occasions when they closed the pens as necessary.       The system
                      was demonstrated.
                             So much for the point that it was not viable at all.
                       The narrow criticism, Mr. Collins' criticism that Dr. Eastwood
                       should have advised the Club of the need to monitor pens to
                       prevent overcrowding.
                             Sir, his response to that shortly is this: he is responsible
                  H    of course for designing the instructions and giving the advice


J . L. H arpham Ltd
                                                     26




                     as appropriate.  He gets those instructions from them.  One
                     does not need to go through the '81 incident which will be well
                     familiar to you. After it the causes and the remedies were
                     discussed at high level by the Police up to Chief Constable
                     level, and after a number of meetings their conclusion was the
                     way to stop it is to introduce radials.

                           The next step was, it is logged by the documents in the
                 B   core bundle, they discussed it with the Club.  The Club agreed.
                     The instructions are then given to Eastwood to prepare radials
                     for that purpose.  He says;  "Quite right.  I did not say to
                     them when I was instructed 'We want radials in in order to
                     control the filling of the pens.*  I did not say to them in
                     terms 'Well then you must control the filling of the pens'   ^
                     because that was the express foundation of the instructions.

                           It is a point which he spells out.   It is his evidence
                     at Day 27, 17C, 18E, 47B.  Day 28, page 60. But further on
                     this the Club on the Club's own evidence were fully aware of
                     the need that control should be exercised and there should be
                     monitoring.  You have it from Mr. Mackrell, Day 30, 75C, 125D
                     and you have it of course from the Police.   Inspector Calvert
                     with whom these discussions took place has described the system
                     that was actually in operation, so that had Dr. Eastwood said
                 D   to the Club when they said to him:  "We want this in", "Are
                     you going to have monitoring?" the answer would have been:     Yes
                     of course we are" of the type that they described.

                           It is interesting that of course Dr. Eastwood gave his
                     evidence on this subject before Inspector Calvert was called.
                     When Inspector Calvert was called the description he gave of
                     what happened is precisely consistent with what Dr. Eastwood
                 E   had said, he had been led to believe it would be happening.

                           The spacing of barriers.   The suggestion is that
                     Dr. Eastwood did not draw the spacing of barriers to the Working
                     Party's attention.   He says he did. At the end of the day it
                     is a matter for his integrity.   There is no contrary evidence.
                     His evidence that he did is adopted and supported by theLocal
                     Authority in their closing submissions.

                           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   What, that he explained to them?

                           MR. TOULSON:  That there was going to be wider spacing.
                     It all goes back to the question of ....

                           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  I appreciate that.  It is not a
                     question of explaining that in fact there was a discrepancy
                     between the spacing he was going to have and what was in the
                     Guide, the question is whether as the Structural Expert he ought
                     to have taken a different view about having such wide spaces,
                     as I understand it.
                            MR. TOULSON:  I thought the criticism was that he did
                      not draw the matter to their attention, but let it be either
                      way, either that he did not draw it to their attention.
                 H

J. L. H arpham Ltd
                                                   27


                          He says:  "You are starting here with the ground - you are
                    not building a new ground - you are starting here with a ground
                    where it is not appropriate or safe to have gangways.  Instead
                    we are going to allow for the circulation of space. We are
                    going to allow, for the purposes of circulation of space, larger
                    gaps than that which you would have as ordinary gaps between
                    barriers under the Green Guide."  He says that this was discussed.
                B         Certainly there is no contradictory evidence.  It is said
                    that he should not be believed on the point.  It stands as a
                    matter of his integrity there being no contrary evidence.

                          What we do know is that the plans which he put forward
                    to the Working Party in the first instance in 1979 were considered
                    by them at four meetings, two when he wasn't present, two when
                    he was.  Both the two when he wasn't present and the two when he
                    was had Mr. Sheriff there.  The thought therefore that you
                    are not producing plans to some ignorant body of people, you
                    are producing plans for the consideration of inter alia another
                    Structural Engineer who is familiar with the Green Guide and
                    you will recall that the question of the spacing and the allo­
                    wance of circulation space was explicitly done within his initial
                    report which was before the Working Party.
                D         Now whether it was a wise judgment or whether it wasn't
                    there are the arguments either way.

                          Barrier 144.  The high water mark of the criticism is
                    from Mr. Hytner who says the primary responsibility for that
                    decision was Dr. Eastwood's and that he was guilty of an attempt
                    in his evidence to produce what I think is politely termed an
                    ex post facto explanation in order to make scapegoats of Bownes
                    and Police.
                          It is regrettable that if an attack of that kind was to
                    be made on the question it was not put to him and he would have
                    answered it.  It is also in my submission not sound.

                          The position in relation to that decision is this: those
                    present who gave evidence about it, Seaman from the Fire
                    Authority gave evidence on this before we became parties. My
                    only knowledge of it is from reading the transcript, but I note
                    that he gave evidence about it on Day 23, page 63 and was asked
                    no further questions, nobody sought to go into detail.

                          Bownes said it was discussed but could not recall the
                    details.  Calvert gave evidence of the matters which were
                G   discussed and said specifically that Mr. Strange who was present
                    from Eastwoods had in his words an "input" when they discussed
                    the possible effects of removal and the possibilities of putting
                    an alternative barrier in another place.

                          Sir, this is not ex post facto, this is evidence of people
                    from other departments of the matters which were gone into and of
                    course the Structural Engineer, either Mr. Sheriff or a Deputy
                H   was there on that occasion.



J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                    28


                           That decision having been taken the matter was reported
                     to Dr. Eastwood.  It cannot be sound in those circumstances
                     to say that that decision is his primary responsibility.   Had
                     the Working Party on the occasion said:  "We would like to
                     discuss it with Dr. Eastwood" of course they could have done so.

                           That raises the second question:  should he when told of
                 B   the decision which had been made raise obstacles? What he has
                     said about this is he could see the arguments either way.

                           Now the arguments either way I have dealt with in the
                     written submissions.  They don't require further advancing.   May
                     I simply remind you sir of two things in relation to that.

                           One, they were concerned here with an actual - not a
                     hypothetical - an actual problem which was occurring there and
                     which was regarded as a safety matter and had that barrier not
                     been removed, had no action been taken on that complaint and
                     there had been injury at that point, say on this occasion when
                     the gates were opened and you got people down the tunnel or
                     injury in other circumstances, the voices of the critics would
                     then have been saying different to you.

                 D         The other point is this:  I noted in the course of the
                     opening of Phase 2 when Mr. Collins was talking about the problems
                     of weighing one consideration against another when you come to
                     detailed configuration, you sir said:  "Well in any particular
                     place your ultimate decision may be a very difficult equation."
                     It was page 39 of Day 22.

                           "LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  How it is resolved is in the
                           end a very difficult equation, Mr. Collins.  It is
                           a matter for the whole Working Party and obviously
                           other matters of material and at the end of the day
                           it is of course the Local Authority that has the
                           responsibility of deciding what are their requirements."

                     Well you have a difficult equation here.  It is easy for anybody
                     to say afterwards it is wrong.  The arguments are before you.

                           What of course that discussion took place in the context
                     of was that the rate of entry was going to be controlled by
                     turnstiles and that there was going to be monitoring.  Had that
                     been the case there is no reason to suppose that that decision
                     would not have been a right one.

                           Conversely open the gates, have no monitoring and allow
                     an uncontrolled number into a pen already full and one is left
                     with the question whether any configuration of barriers can be
                     intended to or could meet a situation of that kind.  That is the
                     short and simple point at the end of the day.

                           So far as the knock-on consequence on capacity is concerned
                     in relation to 144, we know that when the question of removal
                     of sections of barrier was first raised in 1981, Eastwoods raised
                 H   and brought to the attention of the Local Authority, it would
                     mean lack of calculated capacity.

J. L. H arpham Ltd
                                                     29


                           We know that in 1985 when further radials were put in
                     there is the memorandum of Strange to the Club recording they
                     are not concerned about the loss of capacity resulting, so again
                     in 1985 Eastwoods are saying there will be a loss of calculated
                     capacity.

                           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  But there is a note, isn't there,
                     saying:  "Dr. Eastwood says leave the capacity as it is"?
                 B
                           MR. TOULSON:  That is a later time.  That is the note
                     that I averred to when I said a conscious decision was made to
                     exhibit that to his statement in the first place.

                           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Sorry, that what?

                           MR. TOULSON:  That was the memorandum which was exhibited
                     to his statement in the first instance and his evidence about
                     that was this: on those occasions when alterations were made
                     he had drawn to the attention of the Working Authority, either
                     he or on the last occasion the radial, 144, that there would be
                     a loss of calculated capacity.

                           I rose to make the point that if anybody wanted to have
                     that evidence from the lips of Mr. Strange he could be made
                 D   available to give it.

                           That was specifically raised.  In fact no decision was
                     taken to reduce capacity, the Police expressing the view with
                     which the Local Authority apparently concurred, that it was
                     not going to make that ground less safe for that number of people.

                           Dr. Eastwood is then asked, knowing that the matter has
                 E   been brought up before the Local Authority, whether there is a
                     necessity for the Club to reduce the numbers going in and he
                     takes the view no. He considered that the ground was in fact
                     safe for that number and the reasons that he gave were explored
                     by him in evidence.  He said:  "Do you want my answer then or
                     now?"  I will find the page.  "Do you want my answer then? I
                     thought that it was safe because ...." and in short the numbers
                     we were letting on were less than they had been in the old days,
                     1,000 less.  There was going to be control.   We had put in
                     stronger barriers.  We had put in additional barriers, the radials
                     Basically there were improvements.   The Licensing Authority, it
                     was licensed for that figure.   I was satisfied it was safe for
                     that figure if the operation was properly conducted."

                           Nothing in the evidence has shown that to be a wrong
                     judgment.  What happened on this occasion was not that there was
                     an excess of capacity let into the ground.  What happened on
                     this occasion was that there was a failure to control the
                     distribution.

                           Now I am just looking to give you the page reference where
                     he dealt with that point.  Sir, may I not take up time.  I will
                     give you the page number in a few moments.
                 H         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Thank you.


J. L. H arpham Ltd
                                                30


                             MR. WOODWARD: May I please you, sir.   In the light of
                      the submissions that have been made orally today, that which I
                      had prepared to say will not be adhered to and I will endeavour
                      to deal with the matter in the manner in which the submissions
                      have been made.

                            Sir, I don't propose to rehearse many many of the arguments
                      or to canvas much of the detail of that which the South Yorkshire
                  B   Police have said.

                            Sir, may I begin by saying this:  let there be no doubt
                      about it, the feelings of the South Yorkshire Police; the sorrow
                      and grief of the events of that day will remain with them and
                      no doubt will persist and not for many of the individuals con­
                      cerned be diminished with time, and the legacy also of that day
                      will remain with the Force.

                            Sir, if there is any doubt about the sincerity of many of
                      those men concerned, may we refer to the demeanour in the Inquiry
                      of Mr. Marshall and Mr. Murray, in the manner they gave their
                      evidence and their response to many of the questions and indeed
                      their response to the questions that were asked on behalf of
                      the South Yorkshire Police.

                  D         Similarly, sir, let there be no doubt about it and no anxiety
                      on the subject.  Lessons will be learned if indeed lessons have
                      not already been learnt.  The integrity of those who are respon­
                      sible should not be impuned in any way.  They are concerned to
                      get it right and they are concerned to ensure, so far as they
                      can, no such similar event should ever occur again.

                            Sir, if in our written submissions it appears that we have
                  E   sought to impune the fairness of this Inquiry, that is a mis­
                      understanding and is not intended.  There is no complaint raised
                      against the endeavour, the bona fides and the seriousness with
                      which this attempt within the time available to find out why
                      and how has been made and if that impression does appear from
                      those written submissions then sir I wish that to be eradicated.
                      We do not seek to impune the fairness or the endeavour or the
                      seriousness of what has been attempted.

                            What we do seek to say is this:  that following upon a
                      tragedy such as this there are many interests that have to be
                      served.  Many responses occur.  Feelings are intense and under­
                      standably so.  Stances are taken and in certain circumstances
                      it may be that feelings may tend to rule the thoughts, that
                      feelings may tend to rule reason.

                            We have endeavoured, sir, on all parts.  Sir, we echo,
                      if it is appropriate at this stage to echo, what has been said
                      concerning the Inquiry, the Inquiry Team and indeed the part
                      that everybody has played in this matter.  There has been no
                      want of co-operation from any quarter and it is important to
                      note that the South Yorkshire Police, sir, have provided all
                      their material to the West Midlands Police and inevitably when

                  H

J . L. H arpham Ltd
                                                          31


                         a tragedy such as this occurs, material will still be coming to
                         light.
                               What we say about the Inquiry is this: what we say about
                         the endeavour is this:  simplistic conclusions might be attractive
                         and although it has been said by Mr. Hytner that the careful and
                         considered opening by Mr. Collins for the Inquiry has in the end
                 B       not required to be qualified or modified in any way, indicates
                         that the Inquiry may have got it right and that the evidence is
                         correct.
                               It might also be, sir, that there are some simplistic
                         notions which upon reflection and upon consideration perhaps
                         should not be easily adopted and taken up or readily adopted and
                         taken up.
                               We do not intend to identify all of them, but sir perhaps
                         we might take some examples.  There is the evidence given in
                         this case concerning the position of Stewards and Stewards on
                         the terraces and there is the evidence that the South Yorkshire
                         Police Officers themselves gave.

                               Now one might be forgiven in the circumstances, having
                 D       heard the evidence and listened to all that has been said about
                         it, that of course Stewards would never be on terraces, it would
                         be unthinkable.
                                 Sir, we have sought by inquiry to ascertain what other
                         Clubs
                               LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  You are talking about the Leppings
                     E   Lane terraces when that evidence was given?

                                 MR. WOODWARD:   Indeed sir, yes, the away terraces sir.

                               LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    No, the Leppings Lane terraces at
                         Hillsborough?

                               MR. WOODWARD:  Sir, those are the terraces that the
                         Officers have given their evidence about.  Sir, the Leppings
                         Lane terraces at Hillsborough.

                               Sir, why there should be any distinction between those
                         terraces as terraces from any other terraces is a question that
                         might be raised.
                                LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  Well we are not going to go into
                          all the argument.  It is perfectly obvious, isn't it, one
                          striking difference is there are no gangways?

                                 MR. WOODWARD:   Sir, one will not go into all the arguments

                                LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  No, if you are going to address an
                          argument to me it must be on a sensible basis, Mr. Woodward.

                 H               MR. WOODWARD:   Sir, the evidence concerning the Leppings



J . L. Harpham Ltd
                                                      32


                     Lane terraces has been given quite clearly by the Police and
                     they have explained their position in relation to it.  Sir,
                     we know not whether that is a feature common to all other or
                     any other terraces.  Sir, we put it no higher than this:
                     investigation may reveal, if time is taken to do it, that there
                     are terraces, perhaps without gangways, where there are Stewards.
                     Sir, we do not know for example the layout at Chelsea ....
                 B         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: Well this Inquiry has been in action
                     for how many weeks? Evidence has been invited from any represented
                     party who wants somebody called who could say something useful.

                           MR. WOODWARD: Well sir, that material is now before the
                     Inquiry, it has been put in and also in relation to Norwich it
                     has been put in.

                           Sir, if one is to complain about the lateness of material
                     appearing, sir we might be here for a long time.

                           I apologise for having   to say that, but material which
                     has been in the hands of the   West Midlands Police, for example
                     since May, since before this   Inquiry began has only now been
                     emerging within the past ten   days.
                 D         Sir, it is perhaps not helpful to go into and debate that
                     point because it detracts from the issues which the Inquiry has
                     to be satisfied about.

                           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  I am sorry, Mr. Woodward, I am
                     finding your submissions ambivalent.  Less than five minutes
                     ago you were congratulating the West Midlands Police on the
                 E   degree of co-operation received.

                           There was a remark which might have been taken in this
                     written submission to be a snide reference suggesting thatacertain
                     statement which you said they must have had in their possession
                     when a particular point was canvassed weeks before you actually
                     saw it.
                           I took your remarks a few minutes ago about co-operation
                     to have suggested that that was one of the things you said at
                     the beginning that perhaps had not been happily expressed in
                     your written submissions, but now you are repeating it again.

                           MR. WOODWARD:  Sir, what I am seeking to say is this:
                     the material is there and the material is still coming out, so
                     one cannot criticise the people for the formidable task tha
                     they have h a d .
                            Sir, what I would urge is this: when material does come
                      out in that manner, sir it is not helpful necessarily to a
                      resolution of the many questions that the Tribunal has to answer.

                            Sir, I do not criticise and say that they should have
                      produced it earlier because it is plain from our experience
                 H    of what the West Midlands Police have done and from what the
                      Inquiry have done, that whenever there has been a question they


J . L. Harpham Ltd
                                                       33


                      have done their utmost and indeed the speed of their response
                      sir cannot be criticised, but sir the fact is that that material
                      continues to come out and the material continues to come out
                      indeed after the date by which the written submissions had to
                      be in.  Sir, that must be inevitable that is likely to occur ....

                            LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: Well you are not suggesting we should
                      have waited 6 months to start this Inquiry, are you, or are you.
                  B
                            MR. WOODWARD:    Sir, if one ---

                            LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Well I would like to know.   Are you?

                            MR. WOODWARD: Whether one should wait must be determined,
                      sir, upon the objectives.  It is known that the Inquiry must
                      continue and that the inquest in relation to this matter cannot
                      take place until as we understand it the beginning of the next
                      year.
                            Sir, it would be impertinent to suggest that the Inquiry
                      should have waited for ever.  There must be a time when the
                      endeavour has to be made, but sir the point I make is if
                      according to whatever date is selected, thereafter material
                  D   continues to be produced, then sir the production of *ha
                      material of course has to be taken into account, but it renders
                      more difficult the task of the Inquiry and the task of the
                      Inquiry it is ....
                            LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    I am conscious that the Inquiry
                      has a difficult task.

                  E         MR. WOODWARD:  Sir, I apologise if by our address or by
                      our submissions we are causing that to be rendered the more
                      difficult.  We hope sir that our endeavour, and there
                      no criticism of the South Yorkshire Police of which we ^ e
                      aware, that they have failed to co-operate.  Sir, the endeavour
                      has been there by everyone.
                             Sir, so whilst the point is well made, we have been here
                       for six-and-a-half, seven weeks, why haven't we had the evidence
                       about what happens on other terraces?  Sir, we have only had
                       six-and-a-half or seven weeks in which to get here.

                             Another matter in respect of which we would submit a
                       simplistic conclusion might be drawn is when the barrier_failed.
                       Sir? when that Barrier 124A failed is in our             “ d
                       important issue because it is likely to have been associated
                       with the failure of that barrier, with injury and death.

                             Sir, there has been material before the Inquiry consisting
                       of video material, consisting of statements from individuals,
                       and sir amonqst that material which has more lately appeared
                                            by individuals putting other times on when
                       the barrier failed.

                  H          How one makes a decision about that is a question that
                       we find difficult to answer.  One must do the best one


J . L. H arpham Ltd
                                                    34


                    the circumstances, but sir upon that issue we would submit that
                    there is evidence which demonstrates, or is capable of being
                    regarded as demonstrating, that the barrier or part of it may
                    have failed at 14.47.47 or thereabouts and that comes from
                    looking at the video which we referred to on the last day of
                    the Inquiry.

                           Sir, the reason we say that that may be indicative of the
                B   barrier failing then is not easily apparent and not readily
                    apparent upon a first viewing of the video.   There is a man
                    jumping or standing on that barrier in a white shirt.   He is
                    holding the hand of a gentleman in a brown or a suede jacket.
                    The gentleman in the brown suede jacket, sir his movements when
                    i^atched we would submit tend to show that at one stage his
                    progress up and down in the course of surging or movement is
                    inhibited by some obstruction, likely to be the barrier, and
                    at a point thereafter he is able to move up and down which if
                    the obstruction was the barrier it is no longer there.   It is
                    not easily seen.

                          Sir, against that evidence is to be put the evidence I
                    think of Mr. Burridge and other witnesses who suggest that the
                    barrier failed later on.
                D         There may have been two failures and indeed that is con­
                    sistent in part with Dr. Eastwood's evidence, first the centre
                    part and then the end part, but sir when that barrier failed is
                    an important question in our submission and it is a question
                    that it may be difficult in the circumstances to assess.

                          Now sir with trepidation I make the next point*  In the
                    Health and Safety Executive report we are told that calculations
                E   are being made concerning the forces required to break that
                    barrier.  Sir page 2:

                          "Calculations to establish the force required to
                          cause the collapse of Barrier 124A and the collapse
                          sequence are currently underway."

                    Sir, that is dated the 13th June 1989.  If those calculations
                    have been done and if the sequence has been done, calculated and
                    worked out sir, we have not seen it.

                          Sir, if that is an unfair criticism no doubt the point
                    will be bowled back, but that is material which may be helpful
                    to the Inquiry.
                          We note what Dr. Eastwood said about it and Dr. Eastwood
                    said that in his view the barrier had gone because of the degree
                    of force that had been put    upon it.

                          Sir, we would submit that the force, that all that can
                    be said about the collapse     of the barrier on the evidence atthe
                    moment is that the force upon it was greater than it could
                    withstand.
                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                     35


                            LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  Well at 2.46 in the photographs to
                      which you have made frequent reference, it is your case that the
                      pen really is very comfortable and in those circumstances it
                      is very difficult to see what would cause the barrier to break
                      at 2.47?
                            MR. WOODWARD: Well unless, sir, it was something about
                      the state of the barrier.  The barrier broke and if it broke at
                  B   2.47 then sir there has to be an explanation for it. May that
                      explanation be that it was in a poor state? Can that be dismissed?
                      Is it fanciful?
                            Sir, again when one looks at the material that is available
                      more problems perhaps than answers become identified.  We know
                      from the Health and Safety Executive, and again sir it is a
                      point that perhaps is made with some trepidation, that it is
                      said that 2,000 people or thereabouts came in through the second
                      opening of Gate C.  If it is assumed, as Mr. Collins in his
                      submission suggests that most of those people went down the
                      tunnel and it is assumed that because of the geography there half
                      of those went into each pen, it would mean sir given the head
                      count made, that no more than about 500, 600 or 700 people were
                      in Pen 3 at the time that those individuals came in.
                  D         Sir, the mathematics can be looked at and it is not
                      necessary at this juncture perhaps to go through them, but the
                      Health and Safety figure for the number in Pen 3 was 1,576.
                      Of course that is only an estimate and it is only a count done
                      on the information that is available.  It may have been higher.

                            Sir, again when one looks at the material, we fear in a
                      number of respects more questions are raised than are answered.
                  E
                            Sir, a third matter, a simplistic view that might be
                      taken and perhaps it is reflected in the approach made by
                      Mr. Hytner in his submission, that there was at 2.52 a surge.

                            Sir, an analysis of the material, a consideration of the
                      evidence of the fans does not render in our submission the
                      assertion that there was a surge at the time that the barrier
                      may have failed. We don't intend to go through all the matters
                      or debate the inconsistencies.  It is really not in the end
                      helpful because the Inquiry will form its own view and there is
                      no lack of confidence in the endeavour to get it right by the
                      Inquiry Team and in relation ....

                             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  Well in that regard I would be
                       grateful if you would explain to me what you mean on page 29,
                       middle of the page where you say:

                             "Whilst it may be considered that notions such as
                             the burden and standard of proof may impede the
                             Inquiry process ...." I don't know what that means
                             frankly ".... the fact is that they have not featured.
                                                                            How could
                  H    That still more I do not understand what you mean,
                       they have featured so far?


J . L. H arpham Ltd
I




                                                        36


                           MR; WOODWARD:    Sir, if it is incomprehensible, I apologise.

                           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     Well what does it mean?

                           MR. WOODWARD:    I will endeavour to explain what it means.

                           Sir, one is aware that the endeavour that has been made
                     here in this building to get to the answers how and why has been
                 B   made not in the context of a Court.

                           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     Right.

                           MR. WOODWARD:    Not in the context of individuals giving
                     evidence on oath.
                           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  That is another point. Are you
                     suggesting any particular witness whose evidence you think would
                     have been different if it had been on oath?

                           MR. WOODWARD:    Sir, the question must be asked.

                           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     Well I am asking it.     Are you
                     suggesting that?
                 D         MR. WOODWARD:    Well who can say, with respect sir?

                           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     You can say whether you are suggesting
                     it or not.
                           MR. WOODWARD:  The evidence has not been given on oath.
                     That distinguishes what has happened here from the Court setting.
                 E         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:      Is that the only answer you are
                     going to give me?
                           MR. WOODWARD:     Sir, if I am asked to identify witnesses
                     whose evidence ....
                           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  You see this kind of thing is easily
                     said, Mr. Woodward.  You open with a swingeing set of criticisms
                     and then you say you are not criticising.

                            You start off by saying:

                            "No rules of evidence prevailed; no sworn testimony
                            was given; leading questions; hearsay."

                      This is not a list, as you know.  It is not a Court case, it is
                      an inquiry.  It is an inquisitorial inquiry and so far no findings
                      have been made, so how you can say that the burden of proof has
                      not featured I just don't understand.

                            MR. WOODWARD:  Sir, I intended as in.the ^ a l i s s t i c sens e -
                      What is the burden of proof? Where does it stand and what is
                      the situation?
                 H

J. L. H arpham Ltd
                                                         37


                                LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  Well there it is.  I have drawn your
                          attention to matters in your written material which of course
                          have been delivered to the Press as well as to other parties
                          and to the Inquiry which would seem to suggest that you are
                          criticising the way in which the Inquiry has approached its
                          task, but on your feet today you as I say ambivalently flirted
                          with that and at the same time suggested that you are quite happy
                          that everybody has been trying to do their best to make their
                  B       best endeavours and I really don't quite know what you are saying
                          now.
                                MR. WOODWARD:  Sir, there should be no ambivalence about
                          it, but in the circumstances there is perhaps no other way that
                          this endeavour could have been made given the exigencies of time
                          and given the situation.
                                Sir, it is the case that witnesses have given evidence.
                          They have looked at their statement.  Sir, that is the nature
                          of the beast.  That is the nature of the endeavour that we have
                          been about, but sometimes that is not understood, that is not
                          understood by those who sit and observe these things.

                                The Inquiry in every respect has made its best endeavour
                          with the co-operation of L o s e who are here to get to the answer
                  D       that it seeks to pursue, to get to the objective
                          in the quickest time.
                                Sir, that does involve leading questions; that may
                          involve reasonably asking for speculation and °Pjfion and
                          reasonably it may invite individuals to express their own view
                          about things.
                      E         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Well there it is, Mr. Woodward.

                                 MR. WOODWARD:  Sir, if I have lit the blue touch paper
                           sir, I hope I have not retired.
                                 Sir, what we urge against is the arriving at conclusions
                           which when all the material is looked at may be
                           which it will be said:  "We are sorry, we can t come to
                           conclusion upon that" or "That is a conclusion which before
                           it really is reached other evidence and other material should
                           be sought."
                                 Sir, we do not know what evidence or material is
                           available or miqht vet be obtained. We are not complaining
                           ?hai S a t which has been obtained has in any way been held back.
                           This has not been a whitewash and sir we are aware of that.

                                 Sir, I have gone on for longer than I intended.

                                 LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  I have no intention of stopping
                           you because I am afraid I have interrupted you quite a bit,
                           but you take your own course.

                  H              MR. WOODWARD:   Thank you sir.



J . L. H arpham Ltd
                                                       38


                            Sir, on the 15th of April what happened was an event that
                      given the description of most football fans which is set out
                      by Mr. Collins on page 32, paragraph 7:

                            "Most football fans are decent law abiding people
                            and if treated as human beings are likely to react
                            sensibly"
                  B   and given the recognition by the Football Association in paragraph 6
                      on page 4 of their report that:

                            "The Police, including the South Yorkshire Police in general do
                            a magnificient job in managing football crowds week
                            in and week out throughout the season at very considerable
                            commitment of Officers* time and Police resources in
                            general"

                      makes, given those two ingredients, the events of that day all the
                      more difficult to understand.

                            Sir,   it may be that there were material differences in the
                      crowd that   day.  There may be individuals who did not appreciate
                      as soon as   they should have done what was happening, but again
                  D   the perils   of hindsight are to be referred to.

                            In the submissions of Counsel for the Inquiry there is
                      reference to the drink, to the hooligan element.   There is
                      reference to people without tickets.   It is said, and no doubt
                      this was true, that those individuals were in a minority, but
                      sir the use of that phrase may obscure the effect that those
                      individuals had.
                  E         Sir, a little leaven, a little yeast, some bubbles in the
                      bath water can have a considerable effect and the fact that those
                      individuals may have been in the minority does not in our sub­
                      mission detract from the argument that their part may have been
                      potent in what happened and of course sir where an Officer might
                      make a mistake, an error of judgment which thereafter he may
                      be criticised rightly or wrongly, that will not help the situation.

                            Sir, the events that occurred on that day were in our sub­
                      mission on behalf of the Police the crushing outside the Leppings
                      Lane end, events which were not foreseen and in our submission
                      the extent and degree of what happened there was not reasonably
                      foreseeable.
                            The decision of Mr. Marshall to open the gates is not
                      criticised.  Criticism is made of what happened in relation
                      to that endeavour.  Criticism is made in relation to the failure
                      to have taken steps to restrict the flow of individuals that
                      came in when the gates were opened.

                             Sir, the Inquiry will make its assessment of the merit
                       of those criticisms.  The Officers have given their evidence
                       and their position has been made plain.
                  H

J . L. H arpham Ltd
                                                        39


                           The feelings that have been aroused in consequence of
                     those events ought not to detract from the careful analysis
                     which is being attempted here of the material and the fact
                     that events may have occurred does not, although this may not
                     be the place to raise the matter and indeed as my learned friend
                     Mr. Glasgow has said, these issues may be determined in relation
                     to the particular context at another time and another place,
                     but sir we will sit down having thanked the Inquiry for its
                 B   kindness and co-operation and if sir we have been impertinent
                     or objectionable we apologise, but sir we do insist that the
                     simplistic view should be avoided.

                           lord   JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Thank you, Mr. Woodward.

                           MR. TOULSON:     Sir, may I give you the page reference?

                           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:      Yes.    Thank you very much.

                           MR. TOULSON:  It is in relation to Dr. Eastwood's evidence
                     that the certified figure remained in his view a safe ^ u r e ,
                     although he had drawn attention to the Green Guide
                     approach, is found in brief at Day 28, page 22G to 23B, tha
                     is in brief.  It is gone into at greater length at page 67
                     onwards the same day.  Sir, would you be kind enough to read
                 D   the point also with the final paragraph in our skeleton
                     submissions which deals with the question.

                            LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     Yes, thank you.

                           MR. COLLINS:  Sir, like those who have gone before, I
                     don't propose to repeat what is already set out in writing in
                     what we have called our "Final Observations on        °* ££®nted
                 E   Tribunal" but I think it would perhaps be helpful i£ I commentea
                     on one or two matters that perhaps ! have not covered and w hlch
                     have been dealt with by others.
                            Sir before I do that may I put on a white sheet and
                      refer t o a couplt of errors in the observations. There are
                      of course some obvious typing errors but there are two which
                      I think I ought to draw specific attention to.

                            The first occurs on page 15 in the p a r a g r a p h numbered 2
                      on that page, the third line from the bottom         As ^ r e a c l s ^
                      it is "But we do not think we can be criticised •                      r
                      be "he could be criticised". It may be a fairly obvious error
                      but it obviously is an important difference in the meaning.

                             Sir, the other factual error which has been drawn to
                 G
                      my attention occurs on page 34 at P a r a g r a p h :
                                                                          U 4 ^ 1 Meeting
                      JL .i-_i.      whpre the first sentence reads:         Mucn m ieeiJ.ny
                      was generated by the allegation made that afternoon that fans
                      had taken down a fence".    I          / a n n o t say how Aaain
                      there.    That should of course read forced a gate . Again
                      I think it is a fairly obvious error but one for which
                      apologise.
                 H

J . L H arpham Ltd
                                                   40



                               At the risk of being told   that I am   being simplistic,it
                         would appear from the evidence we have heard that the immediate
                         cause of this disaster was the opening of Gate C at 3.52 without
                         the taking of adequate steps, or indeed any steps, to prevent
                         those coming in through that gate from going into the pens.

                               The pens were already if not at capacity, certainly very
                 II      near capacity, and the additional numbers coming in quite
                         clearly, we would suggest, on the evidence that we have heard,
                         caused the injuries and the deaths.

                               Now to say that that is and was the immediate cause is
                         of course by no means the whole   answer to   the problems that
                         face you sir in deciding on the   events of   the 15th of April
                         of this year, because there were of course, or there are the
                         questions to be asked as to what necessitated the opening of
                         the gates, what caused the pens to be in a situation where
                         they were already at capacity and yet nothing had been done to
                         ensure, quite apart from any question of opening of the gates,
                         that further fans should not be able to go into those pens and
                         of course the issues as to the speed of reaction   of the Police
                         to the events that were going on in the pens.

                 D             All those matters have been fully dealt with in the sub­
                         missions that we have made and indeed that others have made
                         and as I say I do not go into them in detail again.

                               May I just though mention one matter and it arises out
                         of the observations made by M r . Woodward a few moments ago in
                         relation to the time at which the barrier collapsed in Pen 3.

                     E         Now there can of course be no doubt but that the collapse
                         of that barrier did cause injuries and deaths.   One only has
                         to look at the horrifying video that we saw of the pile of
                         bodies in the vicinity of the gate to Pen 3 which would have
                         been virtually in front of that barrier which collapsed, but
                         if that happened as Mr. Woodward would have the Inquiry accept
                         at 2.47 as opposed to somewhat later than that, again it is
                         not possible   to be precise   and there is conflicting       evidence
                         about it, but certainly on the preponderance of   the evidence t
                         would appear to have occurred certainly after the teams came
                         out on to the pitch and probably after kick-off at 3 o'clock
                         but beyond that it is not possible safely to go.

                               As I say, if it happened at 2.47, that means that there
                         was not only considerable overcrowding in Pen 3 but evidence
                         which should have been apparent to any Police Officer on the
                     G   perimeter that something had gone very badly wrong in that
                         pen at 2.47.
                                Now if that be right then the delay in doing anything
                          about it is a delay of at least ten minutes on the evidence
                          that we have had.  I don't think anyone has suggested in the
                          course of this Inquiry that the Police delayed that long, bu
                          if Mr. Woodward is correct in his submissions, it may be tha
                 H        he has not thought through the consequences for his clients



J. L. H arpham Ltd
                                                    41


                     and in particular for those who should have been observing
                     what was happening in those pens if, as I say, that collapse
                     really did occur at 2.47.

                           The truth is, as I have said, that in our submission it
                     is almost inevitable to find that it happened later and that
                     there is therefore a connection and a real connection between
                 B   the opening of that gate and the coming of the fans into the
                     pens, the overcrowding and the disaster.

                           Now we have said in our submissions that the disaster
                     was wholly avoidable, echoing without knowing it the language
                     of Mr. Jackson in the forefront of his submissions.

                           We have said that it arose, and we repeat that it arose
                     not through callousness, not through any deliberate action on
                     the part of the Police or indeed anyone else because it is not
                     only the Police.

                           We suggest that it arose because of ignorance, because
                     of complacency and because of lack of foresight by those
                     responsible for the safety of the spectators in that ground.

                 D         Now there was undoubtedly a badly behaved minority of
                     fans who must bear some responsibility for the continuation
                     at least of the crush outside the Leppings Lane turnstiles,
                     although we would suggest the evidence establishes they did
                     not cause the crush originally, but as I say we think that there
                     is evidence, it is evidence from a large number of Police
                     Oficers with a different degree of emphasis, that certainly
                     they contributed to the continuation of that crushing.
                 E
                           Having said that there can be no doubt that they bear
                     no responsibility for the dangerous overcrowding in the pens
                     or for the deaths and injuries that resulted from that dangerous
                     overcrowding and indeed that is a matter which was explicitly
                     put by Mr. Hytner to Chief Superintendent Duckenfield when
                     he elicited from Chief Superintendent Duckenfield the apology
                     for the inference that had been drawn as a result of
                     Mr. Duckenfield1s observations that the fans were in any way
                     responsible for the deaths and injuries in the pens.

                           I have said "complacency, ignorance and lack of foresight."
                     Complacency, we say that was effectively the belief by the Police
                     and to a degree by the Club that there were no problems.  I
                     have isolated the Police and the Club, that may not be fair to
                     either of them because it was the Working Party as well, every­
                 G   one concerned with the safety of that ground.

                            Previous semi-finals had apparently gone well.  The Police
                      plan had seemed to work; no problems were therefore foreseen.

                            In truth we know that those turnstiles at Leppings Lane,
                      having regard to the bottle-neck and having regard to the
                      numbers with which they had to cope were insufficient.
                 H

J. L. H arpham Ltd
                                                     42


                           We know that there was no proper system for monitoring
                     the pens and that such system or non-system as there was was
                     clearly dangerous.
                           Ignorance, lack of appreciation that there always had
                     been overcrowding in these pens and inability to recognise
                     when too many people were gathered together on a terrace.
                 B         The photographs which were produced as part of the
                     Fire Brigade's evidence were you may think sir most instructive
                     in this regard and I suspect that many people may have been
                     surprised at the gaps there were when the pens were filled
                     a volume of 54 people per 10 square metres.

                           It is not a picture of the sort of dense packing that one
                     is used to seeing in pens and indeed if one looks at the photo­
                     graphs of last year one sees a picture which suggests a density
                     much greater than the 5.4, 54 per 10 square metres, but it is
                     that sort of density which football fans have bee“
                     to put up with and people observing who are in a position to
                     monitor safety and who are concerned with safety are equally
                     conditioned to look at, and that we feel has been one
                     problems and one of the major problems in this instance.
                 D
                           It is quite plain that education is needed and needed
                     quickly so that all those concerned, Stewards, Police and ind
                     others know what sort of packing or what sort of numbers rat e
                     of 5.4 look like when packed on a terrace.

                           Of course I add to the ignorance ignorance of the fact
                     that people were in distress and perhaps a failure to look
                 E   out for that sufficiently because of a conditf°n1^     ^   so
                     view that fans must not come out of the pens because to do so
                     is a pitch invasion.
                            Third, lack of foresight.  The Police did not appreciate
                      the Dossibility, so it would seem, of late arrivals or of
                      troublesome arrivals all at once and so no proper preparations
                      were made for it.
                               We suggest that greater thought should have been 9-i-ven
                      to what I have described as "long distance polic ng        y
                      I m e a n policing of people arriving away from t h e immediate
                      vicinity of the turnstiles and the ground, something which as
                      I said in opening was raised not I think in 1926, another
                      mistake in the submissions, but in 1924 following the first
                      Cup Final at Wembley in 1923.
                            There was a failure to foresee the consequences of
                      openinq the gate and there was a failure to foresee that there
                      was a lack of proper arrangements to monitor and control th
                      filling of the pens.
                            Sir, that is a summary and a short summary of the way
                      in which we put this. As I say I am not going to go into
                 H    further detai1 because it is all contained in our written



J. L. H arpham Ltd
                                                    43


                     submissions which should be read, of course, with what I have
                     said to you here and now.

                           There is a matter with which I ought to deal and one or
                     two comments which I ought to make in answer to some of the
                     matters that have been raised inwritten submissions and today.

                           This tragedy happened almost exactly three months ago
                 B   and that means of course that this Inquiry has progressed
                     exceedingly quickly.
                           It is of course very much in the public interest that you
                     sir should be able to have the factual basis, that is the know­
                     ledge of what happened on the 15th of April and why it happened,
                     to make your interim recommendations before the commencement
                     of the next season.  The safety of spectators requires that
                     that should be done.
                           It is of course equally important that the true circum­
                     stances should be discovered so that any recommendations are
                     not based on misconceptions as to the true factual position
                     and no person or body is unfairly criticised in any report that
                     is made.
                 D         We have, and Iam speaking here for m y   Juniors and for
                     those instructing me   and I think, I don't    think I now,
                     the investigators, the West Midlands Police.

                           We have at all   times been conscious   ofthe need to  balance
                     thoroughness and speed and more particularly of the need not
                     to sacrifice accuracy to speed.
                 E         We believe that we have struck the right balance and that
                     no witness has been omitted who could have shed a different
                     light on any part of the story of the events of the 15th of
                     April.
                                There have of course, as I said at the outset this
                      morning, been additional statements and additional witnesses
                      have come to light, but we suggest that those are glosses
                      the evidence already given and do not significantly
                      any important aspect of that evidence and we are comforted
                      that eight at least out of nine of the parties appearing before
                      y S f s I r seem to have no complaint on this particular score.
                      There is one exception, the Police.
                            I think I must say frankly that we are surprised and
                 G    disappointed by the attitude shown in those final submissions
                      which do reflect to an extent their conduct of the
                      at this Inquiry.
                            It must have been abundantly clear to everyone in this
                      room and to anyone who had sat through the e^ e n c e in this
                      inouirv that mistakes had been made by the Police, yet
                      two I think have effectively been admitted.  One very grudgingly
                 H

J. L. H arpham Ltd
                                                     44


                     by Chief Superintendent Duckenfield that he had not taken steps
                     to cater for the opening of Gate C and the other by Chief
                     Superintendent Mole and Inspector Sewell that the agreed
                     emergency arrangements struck in August 1988 between the Police
                     and SYMAS had not been incorporated in the Operational Order
                     of 1989.

                 B         Despite the evidence from all the senior Officers that
                     it was recognised and accepted that no Sheffield Wednesday
                     Football Club Stewards would be in or monitoring numbers in
                     the terrace and in the pens and that therefore the Police would
                     be doing this, again and again witnesses were cross-examined
                     on the basis that the Green Guide says:   'Stewards are
                     responsible and the Police are not."

                           In paranthesis we cannot see how the evidence that has
                     been adduced this morning before the Inquiry of what other
                     Forces do in other football grounds, can conceivably assist
                     you in your fact finding task as to what happened at this
                     ground on the 15th April 1989 because it is that, of course,
                     with which you are concerned.
                           No responsibility for any part of the factors contributing
                 D   to the disaster, that is to say the crush at the turnstiles,
                     the overfilling of the pens, the slowness to react, has been
                     accepted by the Police and since mistakes are not accepted
                     I think people as Mr. Hytner said, would be forgiven for
                     believing that it is thought that no lessons are needed to
                     be learnt.
                           We now find in the final submissions as I understood
                 E   Mr. Woodward's oral submissions, he does not resile from this
                     that the suggestion that the whole Tribunal process is
                     "inherently unsatisfactory and incapable of enabling
                     conclusions to be reached."
                             He said that he did not impune the endeavour but that
                      is not to remove the criticism that the results would not be
                      achievable.
                            When I started - it sounds a bad way, doesn't it - when
                      I started in the law I was told that if you had a bad case
                      attack your opponent.  This sir takes things perhaps a stage
                      further, attack the Tribunal as an alternative approach and
                      then perhaps it will be thought that any adverse findings
                      be brushed aside.
                 G          Complaint has been made of the lack of rules of ^ d e n c e .
                      This is, as you sir have pointed out a moment ago, an Inqui y.
                      It is nit a lawsuit between parties.  It is designed to get at
                      the truth and the absence of the rules of e v i d e n c e does not
                      make that impossible or more difficult.  Indeed quite the
                      contrary we would suggest.
                            May I take an unusual course and remind you, sir,     lock
                 H    my learned friend of what an eminent Judge, Lord Justice Diplo



J. L. H arpham Ltd
                                                  45



                     as he then was, said in respect of inquiries and inquisitorial
                     approaches.  For the reference this is from a case called
                     R. -v- Deputy Industrial Injuries Commissioner ex parte Moore
                     which I have in 1965 1 AER page 81 at page 9 4 .

                           What the learned Lord Justice said was pointing out that
                     findings must be based on evidence following a fair hearing was
                     this.  He said:
                 B
                           "Evidence is not restricted to evidence which would
                           be admissible in a Court of Law.

                           For historical reasons based perhaps on the fear that
                           juries who might be illiterate were incapable of
                           differentiating between the probitive values of
                           different methods of proof, the practice of the
                           Common Law Courts has been to admit only what the
                           Judges then regarded as the best evidence of any
                           disputed fact and thereby to exclude much material
                           which as a matter of commonsense would assist a fact
                           finding Tribunal to reach a correct conclusion."

                     And he goes on to say that the decision reached must be based:
                 D         "On material which tends logically to show the
                           existence or non-existence of facts relevant to the
                           issue to be determined."

                     We would respectfully suggest to you, sir, that you are not to
                     be equated to an illiterate juryman and that the evidence that
                     we have heard in this Inquiry and the way that that evidence
                     has been elicited is adequate and proper and sufficient to enable
                 E   you not only to make findings but to make findings which are
                     accurate and reliable findings and to suggest to the contrary
                     is quite wrong.

                           Indeed so far as the procedure is concerned by which this
                     Inquiry approached its task it was one which was specifically
                     put to and agreed by all Counsel appearing for all parties as
                     being fair in all the circumstances, and that being so, sir,
                     it is in our submission quite wrong that the suggested criticisms
                     of the reliability of any findings that you may make are thought
                     to have any validity whatever.

                           Now it is clear, and it must have been clear beyond a
                     peradventure and particularly having regard to the submissions
                     made by all parties other than the Police, that criticisms
                 G   would be made of the Police operation on the 15th of April,
                     not individual Officers, certainly other than those responsible
                     at the top, most of whom acted with presence of mind and in
                     some cases with great heroism and devotion beyond the call of
                     duty.
                           It is all the more unfortunate, we would suggest, that
                     those criticisms have not been accepted and that attempts have
                 H   been made to shift the blame.



J. L. H arpham Ltd
                                                       46


                           I say this because there is inevitably and properly very
                     real sympathy for the Police and the difficult task that they
                     have to perform and the role they have to play in controlling
                     and policing crowds at football matches.

                           That sympathy is in danger of being dissipated by the
                     manner in which they have presented their case to this Inquiry.

                 B         It is   a sad indictment of football and its fans that
                     segregation   is necessary and that a Police presence of some
                     800 or more   Officers is thought to be needed. While the majority
                     of the fans   are well behaved, a minority and a minority which
                     is sizeable   in terms of pure numbers is not.

                           Their conduct was deplorable.  There is a common theme
                     in the Police evidence, I say "common theme" there are exceptions
                     because the Police evidence ranged from those who were very
                     critical of the fans to those who were not really so critical
                     and said it was not a very great deal different from what one
                     would expect of fans at any particular match, but there is a
                     theme which suggests that the behaviour was worse than anything
                     which had been experienced by South Yorkshire Police before.

                           So be it. That sort of behaviour, we would suggest, is
                 ®   not peculiar to Liverpool Football Club and is known at sadly
                     many Football Clubs and their supporters throughout the land,
                     but to have 800 or more Police on duty to deal with anticipated
                     trouble from fans and to control the crowds and then to say that
                     activities such as have been described namely taking of drink,
                     irresponsibility, attempts to enter without tickets and so on
                     are not foreseeable, is frankly, we would suggest, nonsensical.

                           I have dealt with the question of the barrier.      I shall
                     not go over that again.
                           Let me now come to one or two specific comments in relation
                     to submissions made by others.

                           The City Council.  Can I ask you sir to look to page 6 of
                     their submissions.  They say there at the end of the first
                     paragraph on that page:
                             "The Certificating Authority regarded the Club as
                             likely to be in a position to prevent more than
                             7,200 spectators being admitted to the West Terrace.

                      Sir,   I simply append to that the question how on earth could
                      they   regard the Club as likely to be in that position and
                      does   not appear that they made sufficient enquiry to ensure that
                      that   was the position.
                              On the next page just before iii the last sentence.   They
                      say:
                              "The fact that no appeal was ever made or indeed ever
                              threatened is some indication that these Authorities
                 H

J . L. Harpham Ltd
                                                     47


                          did not find fault with the terms of   the Safety
                          Certificate.  This is in relation to   the Police and
                          Fire Services ...."

                     Now if that is intended to be a comment in relation to South
                     Yorkshire County Council then fair enough.  If it is intended
                     to relate to the City Council then with respect it perhaps is
                     not so valid because of course all the interested parties
                 B   believed that there was an active reappraisal of the terms of
                     the Safety Certificate going on over the three years or so
                     since 1986.
                           Sir on page 10, towards the bottom, there is a suggestion
                     made after a criticism of the flexibility approach.  sir' *
                     would adopt that as being, I would suggest, a sensible suggestion,
                     It is at the bottom of the page.
                           Sir on page 19 there is reference to ambiguities in the
                     Green Guide in relation to what is meant by "separate sections
                     of the ground."
                           The comment I would make on that is that with respect
                     commonsense would surely dictate that where there are de faqto
                     segregated areas or areas self-contained in effect, then the
                 D   principle would apply, but one does accept the Green Guide is
                     not perhaps as clear as it might be in that context and having
                     said that there are other respects in which you may feel, sir,
                     that there has been brought to light some ambiguities in
                     Green Guide, the most obvious one Annex C, but clearly ....

                           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Testing the barrier?

                 E         MR. COLLINS:  That is the barrier, the manner of testing
                     the barrier, but clearly consideration will have to be given
                     and no doubt this is a matter which can be pursued at Stage
                     to respects in which the Green Guide can be made clearer or
                     firmed up where necessary.
                             Sir, we would respectfully suggest that the underlying
                      theme of the submissions made on behalf of the City Counci
                      reflects the error of complacency to which 1 have ^eferre
                      one of the three matters in the earlier part of these remark .

                            Sir, so far as the Fire Service are concerned there is
                      no criticism that I have sought to level against them in the
                      course of my final submissions.  They were concerned ’^ h the
                      adequacy of the means of egress from the pens and not with the
                      layout as such and the effect upon capacity as such.

                            The only issue perhaps there is whether it really was
                      so clear that the Police would man those gates at the back,
                      bv which I mean the Police would have an Officer there at
                      all times, or whether the P o l i c e understanding of manning,
                      namely that if the gates were shut and needed to be opened
                      there would be an Officer there was not more what was
                      expected, but that is a matter 'which has been gone through at
                 H    considerable length in the course of the Inquiry.


J . L. Harpham Ltd
                                                   48


                          Sir, so far as SYMAS is concerned you may think sir that
                    the interim suggestions that are set out in their report are
                    all helpful and valid save perhaps for the last one on page 11
                    where they refer to a "possible amendment of the 1975 Act."

                          That there should be some tightening up is no doubt correct
                    but whether they have got it right by suggesting that"if an
                    application is not dealt with within six months there shall have
                B   been deemed to have been a refusal" is another matter because
                    that on the face of it might seem to be possibly unfair to the
                    Club which was of course not responsible for the dilatoriness
                    of the Licensing Authority.

                          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  Certainly I would have thought it
                    would not be a matter for an interim recommendation, in any event.

                          MR. COLLINS: Certainly not for an interim recommendation
                    in any event, I accept that.

                          Sir, I don't want to go into the details of the reasoning
                    of Mr. Kalllpetis, the close reasoning in relation to what was
                    overheard and led to the request or the question about ambulances.
                    You will obviously form your own conclusion.  The only observation
                    I make is that Mr. Kallipetis in his argument relies very
                D   strongly upon the accuracy of one part of Mr. Waugh's evidence
                    and Mr. Waugh's evidence you may feel was not entirely satis­
                    factory in relation to what at the end of the day it was he
                    was saying about the circumstances, or what he heard and the
                    circumstances in which he made the request.

                          Sir the Club at page 5 make a point, an important point
                    and one which you will clearly have to consider.  It is at the
                E   end of the first paragraph on that page where they say that
                    they do not believe they are alone in expressing the view that
                    it would be regrettable if this tragedy led to the abolition
                    of the terrace as a viewing area.

                          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Again that is a matter of long-term
                    consideration.
                          MR. COLLINS:  Of course that is a matter for long-term
                    but if we are right in our submission that the key to safety
                    is control of numbers, then although again we accept that perhaps
                    there can never be any such thing as an absolutely guaranteed
                    safe terrace, because however much you keep to capacity there
                    is always the danger of swaying and that sort of thing which
                    can cause trouble and of course people bunching up together
                    if they are in one particular part, but having said that clearly
                    one must bear in mind that it would be a drastic step, and I
                    have no doubt sir you will bear in mind and certainly as you
                    say it is not a matter perhaps for an interim recommendation,
                    that it would be a drastic step to recommend the complete
                    abolition, in effect, of viewing from terraces.

                           Sir the point is made at page 7 that this was a first
                     class ground" and that the Club had adopted a "thoroughly
                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                          49


                          responsible attitude towards their obligations and safety.

                                Sir one accepts that, but it underlines you may think
                          the problem, because the evidence may satisfy you that this
                          tragedy was inevitable at some time given the layout of Leppings
                          Lane and given the system or lack of it in relation to the
                          monitoring of the numbers in the pens and perhaps that only
                          goes to show how much needs to be learnt to avoid anything
                  B
                          such as this ever happening again.

                                Sir at the bottom of page 10 and on to page 11 it is
                          suggested that "even a perfect system would not have had any
                          material effect on the consequences of the additional rush
                          of some 2,000 fans."
                                That on the face of it is a plausible point, but in our
                          submission what it ignores is this:  had there been a proper
                          system to monitor capacity in those pens to stop them over­
                          filling, as a matter of fact it is plain that they had become
                          full before Gate C was openad and therefore there would have
                          been by then a system which would have meant that that tunnel
                          would have been blocked off and no one would have come through
                          Gate C down into the pens.  Therefore we suggest there is in
                  D       that respect a direct connection or a contributory factor in
                          the lack of system of monitoring the pens and the tragedy that
                          occurred.
                                Sir, at page 12 there is reference to the cross-examination
                          or examination by me of Mr. Mackrell in relation to the tickets.

                                Sir I accept that it may well be that an unfair point
                      E   may have been put to Mr. Mackrell in relation to the B on
                          the ticket because it was plain that in fact that     was
                          stub which was retained by the turnstile operator and to the
                          extent that I suggested the ticket in that way encouraged people
                          to go down the tunnel, I think it may be that that went too far
                          and I would like that to be made clear here and now.

                                 That does not mean that one accepts that the tickets were
                           all they should be.  Clearly ....

                                 LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Well Mr. Mackrell very frankly
                           conceded that.

                                 MR. COLLINS:   As you say, sir, Mr. Mackrell quite clearly
                           accepted that.
                                 Finally on the Club at page 16 there is a reference to
                           the paragraph of the Safety Certificate and the construction
                           I put upon it.
                                 I don't want to argue the point.    Suffice it to say that
                           it is ray submission that the construction there put by Hr.    =9°
                           is one with which I would quarrel and I would suggest that whe
                           the Certificate refers to the "appropriate and relevant standards
                  H        in the Guide" it means what on the face of it says and anything
                           less than that should not do.


J . L. H arpham Ltd
                                 50



      Of course if the Council is satisfied with something less
then the Club could not possibly be committing a criminal
offence in reaching those standards.  What we say is the Club
ought never to be satisfied with anything less than that it
that is what the Safety Certificate says, but of course as
repeat, that would not mean that the Club was doing anything
wrong if the Council in fact was satisfied with something less.
It may be that that is a criticism more properly aimed at the
Council than at the Club.
      Sir, as far as Dr. Eastwood is concerned all I say,
because I have dealt with the matters in my written submissions,
that I would accept that Mr. Toulson makes a fair point when
he says that the Working Party included a Structural Engineer,
and that of course is something which you will no doubt take
into account.
      Sir, finally may I suggest a few of the m o r e important
conclusions in a very shorthand form, not necessarily in any
order of importance and not necessarily exhaustive.

      First of all it was overcrowding rather than the perimeter
fences that caused the danger.
      It is easy to understand why there has been a reaction
and why some of those fences have been removed by other 9*u b s *
One only has to have seen those dreadful photographs in the
Press of people pressed up against the perimeter fence o
realise why that reaction has occurred, but as I say fences
in themselves we suggest are not necessarily the trou le,
is overcrowding.
      Secondly the need for education in relation to the
crowding.
       Thirdly strict controls on numbers and grounds will have
 to accept lower capacities if they cannot count mechanically
 the numbers in any particular part of the terraces.

       Of course there are means, I think there are manual
 clickers.  I accept not entirely accurate but/ *
 can give a guide if there is no other means of <d oing it, but
 as I say there must be lower capacities if mechanical counts
 are not possible.
       There must be a clear understanding in writing preferably
 of the duties of the Stewards and the Police respectively at
 every match and every individual match as to crowd capacity
 on any terraces.
       Five, we suggest that the Police and indeed others.
 Stewards too if they are concerned, must be              J®a t*
 to recognise and trained to recognise the n e e d of people to
 escape from pens where they are in distress and where there
 have been problems of overcrowding.
                               51


      Sixthly, we think greater consideration must be given
at all football grounds, but at Sheffield Wednesday in particular,
to what I have called earlier on "long-distance policing" and
I don't go into that again.

      Seventhly there must be a consistent policy known to all
fans as to what is going to be done to ticketless fans if they
turn up at all ticket matches without tickets.

      This is a matter I think which has been dealt with
recently by the &CPO report but that and touting must clearly
be the subject of a consistent policy at all grounds and
adequate steps must be taken to prevent it and to discourage it.
When I say "it" I mean touting and people turning up without
tickets as much as possible.

      Eighthly, it is plain that Safety Certificates must be
reviewed at shorter intervals.  As to what precisely the correct
interval is will no doubt be a matter of argument, but that they
must be reviewed regularly must, I think, be clear to all.

      Finally there must always be sufficient turnstiles so that
all who have to come through the relevant turnstiles can be
in within a specified period of time, by which I mean that there
should never be less provision than say, and I am simply plucking
a figure out of the air and I don't suggest this is necessarily
the right figure, 7 50, so that all could be got in -within the
hour. Whatever is the right figure again may well be a question
for argument.

      If insufficient turnstiles exist at a ground then the
ground must accept that their capacity will be reduced for that
match to such as is able to be coped with by the turnstiles
that exist.

      Sir, as I say those are hot meant to be exhaustive but
are points that occurred to me that may I hope assist you in
your consideration of any interim recommendations.

      May I finally ally myself with Mr. Glasgow in thanking
theCity Council for the   facilities which they have provided
to us and to the Inquiry Team in this btiilding.  It has made
our task a very great deal easier than it might otherwise
have been.

      Sir, that is all I wish to say.   Thank you.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  Yes, well I again would like to
thank the Authorities for letting us use this extremely
convenient commodious chamber which has made it all a great
deal less trying than it might otherwise have been.  I shall
acknowledge that in the report.                                  /

      Again, at the risk of repetition, I would like to thank
all Counsel for their contribution and for all behind them
who put in so much hard work.  I now must do some hard work
A   *.   •   V




                                                    52



                     with my Assessors and I shall hope to produce an Interim Report
                     very soon.

                           Thank you all very much indeed.


                                          (The Inquiry was closed)
                 B




                 D




                 E




                 H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
