SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE


1. Strength and establishment and increases since Mav 1979

At 28 February 1989 the strength and establishment was as follows:


(i)   Strength         Mav 1979   Februarv 1989       Increase
 -    Police Force       2,560      2,945                 +385
      Civilian Staff       599        853                 +254
      TOTAL              3,059      3,798                 +639


(ii) Establishment       2,752      2,951             +199
                                   (2,978)           (+226)
                                   (with effect from 1 April)


2. Application for 1989/90

South Yorkshire made an application for 50 police posts in 1989/90.
On the advice of HM Inspector of Constabulary, the Home Secretary
approved 27 posts from 1 April. Of this increase, 11 posts were
specifically approved for the introduction of the new stage II
probationer training arrangements in July 1989.
3. Application for 1990/91

The Police Authority have made an application for 50 extra police
posts in 1990/91. This will be considered, with the advice of HM
Inspector of Constabulary, along with application from other police
authorities. We aim to announce increases for 1990/91 in the
Autumn.

4. Civilianisation

Of the posts identified by HM Inspector of Constabulary as suitable
to be undertaken by civilian staff (known as 'key posts') 69.6% are
fulfilled by civilian staff; this is an increase over 1987 of 8.3%.
Between 1985-1988,     80 police posts      have   been   returned   to
operational duty through civilianisation.

There remains considerable scope for further civilianisation in the
Force. HM Inspector has identified the potential for up to 506 key
posts to be civilianised. He has encouraged the Chief Constable to
address further this issue.
5. Growth in police manpower (England and Wales)

(a) At February 1989, there were 125,517 police officers - a gain
of over 14,000 since May 1979.

(b) Taking into account the 1,100 posts for 1989/90, almost 7,000
extra police posts approved for police forces (including the
Metropolitan Police) since May 1979.

(c) Police civilian staff at the end of February 1989 was 42,687-
a gain of over 8,000 since May 1979.

(d) Expenditure for 1989/90 provided at Â£4.1 billion            which
represents a real terms increase of 54.9% over 1978/78.



HILLSBOROUGH : COSTS OF WEST MIDLANDS POLICE INVESTIGATION

The South Yorkshire Police Authority has suggested (in a letter to
the Home Secretary dated 25 April) that the costs incurred by West
Midlands Police in their investigation following the Hillsborough
disaster should not fall on the Police Authority but should be met
directly from central funds.

2. An assurance has been      given by the Home Secretary that West
Midlands Police Authority     will not have to bear any additional
policing costs as a result     of the investigation. Nothing has been
said specifically about who    should bear the costs.

3. In response to the letter to the Home Secretary, it was agreed
that the matter should initially be discussed by officials here and
officers of the South Yorkshire Police Authority. This meeting took
place on 18 May. Home Office officials explained that it would be
unprecedented for Central Government to agree to meet directly the
costs of an investigation which went very much to the heart of
policing in South Yorkshire and which had been at least initiated
by South Yorkshire's Chief Constable. Central Government already
provided support for policing costs through 51% police grant.

4. In certain circumstances (eg. policing of the miners' strike),
additional assistance could be provided by means of a special
grant. The factors which might make an application by South
Yorkshire for such a grant appropriate in this case were:
(i) the unexpected and burdensome nature of the expenditure and
(ii) the fact that the results of the investigation were to be
placed at the service of the enquiry by Lord Justice Taylor (which
in turn might occasion some expansion of the terms of the
investigation). South Yorkshire Police Authority officers felt that
their members might, even if offered such assistance, still wish to
press for direct and full reimbursement to West Midlands.

5. We believe that we cannot justify direct reimbursement and that
it would set an undesirable precedent for other cases where police
authorities might claim that the Government should fully reimburse
their costs. But we do see a case for a special payment to South
Yorkshire which might      (a miners'   strike precedent)   provide
assistance with a substantial proportion of any costs which went
above the product of a penny rate for the area. This would require
Treasury approval. We are consulting the Treasury and will       be
reporting urgently to the Home Secretary. In the meantime,       we
cannot promise South Yorkshire anything except a careful        and
sympathetic consideration of any further representations they might
wish to make on the subject.




LINE TO TAKE


We understand South Yorkshire's concern about the potential scale
of costs of the investigation by West Midlands Police. Home Office
officials have had initial discussions with officers of South
Yorkshire Police Authority and explained the factors which need to
be considered in the case. We promise to look at any further
representations which South Yorkshire may wish to make when they
have considered the report from their officers.
