    INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH
    STADIUM DISASTER


      NEWS RELEASE
  August 4, 1989.                                       01-273 4610

                HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY

                    INTERIM REPORT PUBLISHED

  The Interim Report of the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster Inquiry
  under Lord Justice Taylor is published today. The Judge makes
  extensive findings as to the cause of the disaster and in his
  recommendations proposes 43 instant measures capable of being
  implemented forthwith and, where possible, before the start of the
  next football season.

^ Brief Summary of Causes

  Lord Justice Taylor finds that:-

  "The immediate cause of the gross overcrowding and hence the
  disaster was the failure, when gate C was opened, to cut off
  access to the central pens which were already overfull.

  They were already overfull because no safe maximum capacities had
  been laid down,    no attempt was made to control entry to
  individual pens numerically and there was no effective visual
  monitoring of crowd density.

  When the influx from gate C entered pen 3, the layout of the
  barriers there afforded less protection than it should and a
  barrier collapsed. Again, the lack of vigilant monitoring caused a
  sluggish reaction and response when the crush occurred. The small
  size and number of gates to the track retarded rescue efforts. So,
  in the initial stages, did lack of leadership.

  The need to open gate C was due to dangerous congestion at the
  turnstiles. That occurred because, as both Club and police should
  have realised, the turnstile area could not easily cope with the
  large numbers demanded of it unless they arrived steadily over a
  lengthy period. The Operational Order and police tactics on the
  day failed to provide for controlling a concentrated arrival of
  large numbers should that occur in a short period. That it might
  so occur was forseeable and it did. The presence of an unruly
  minority who had drunk too much aggravated the problem. So did the
  Club's confused and inadequate signs and ticketing."

  Interim Recommendations

  The interim recommendations are designed to prevent overcrowding
  and crushing on terraces in the short term and to improve safety
  procedures. But Lord Justice Taylor says that they do not and
  cannot meet all the problems or address all the issues of post-
  Hillsborough football.
The Judge says:-

"Wider issues such as membership schemes, identity cards, all-
seater stadia, super stadia and long term recommendations fall to
be considered in my Final Report. So do a number of other specific
matters such as a comprehensive review of the Green Guide*, the
problem of excessive pre-match drinking, fans without tickets and
ticket touts."

* Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds.

Lord Justice Taylor says that further evidence and study will be
required before he can make recommendations on these matters.
Accordingly,    he  says,   the  main   thrust of  the   interim
recommendations, as a holding exercise,

"is to reduce numbers on the terraces, to increase vigilance and
to achieve a proper balance in crowd control between  prevention
of disorder and maintenance of safety."

The Judge has made no recommendations about taking down perimeter
fences. But he says that gates in them to the pitch should be kept
open whilst the terraces are occupied. He does, however, stress
that "it will, of course, be necessary to have a police presence
sufficient to prevent pitch invasion for improper reasons through
the open gates."

The Judge finds that in the assessment of figures for capacity,
the criteria in the Green Guide were not applied with sufficient
rigour at Hillsborough. Since this may also have been the case
elsewhere, he recommends that they should be reassessed with
proper and realistic allowance for all the factors concerned. On
top of that, he proposes a further reduction of 15 per cent on
terraces as an interim measure to improve the safety margin.

The scope of the interim recommendations covers the maximum
capacities for terraces, filling and monitoring terraces, fences
and gates, crush barriers, Safety Certificates, the duties of
football clubs, police planning, communications, the co-ordination
of emergency services, and first aid, medical facilities and
ambulances.

The interim recommendations are set out in full in Chapter 24 of
the report.

Part Two of the Inquiry

Lord Justice Taylor and his Assessors will now be starting work on
Part Two of the Inquiry. This will be directed to making final and
long term recommendations about crowd control and safety at sports
grounds. The Judge will be considering the large body of written
evidence submitted to him which he may want to supplement in some
instances with further oral evidence or discussion in conjunction
with his Assessors. He will also need to make a number of visits
and inspections. He has indicated that he expects to prepare his
final report and recommendations at about the turn of the year.
Note to Editors

Following the disaster at Hillsborough stadium on April 15, when
95 people were killed, Lord Justice Taylor was appointed by the
Home Secretary

"To inquire into the events at Sheffield Wednesday football
ground on April 15 1989 and to make recommendations about the
needs of crowd control and safety at sports events."

Lord Justice Taylor was assisted by two Assessors: Mr Brian
Johnson QPM, Chief Constable of Lancashire, and Professor Leonard
Maunder OBE, Professor of Mechanical Engineering at the University
of Newcastle upon Tyne. The secretary of the Inquiry was Mr Robert
Whalley from the Home Office. The investigation of the disaster
and the gathering of evidence was carried out by the West Midlands
Police under their Chief Constable Mr Geoffrey Dear, who appointed
Assistant Chief Constable Mervyn Jones to take full time charge of
the investigation. Counsel for the Inquiry were led by Mr Andrew
Collins QC. Technical tests and studies were carried out at the
Health and Safety Executive's Research and Laboratory Services
Division in Sheffield.

The hearing began on May 15 in Sheffield Town Hall, and continued
for 31 days concluding on June 29. 174 witnesses gave oral
evidence. Transcripts of the evidence came to over 3,800 pages,
and some one and a half million words in all. Lord Justice Taylor
also received some 1550 letters.
NEWS RELEASE                        50 Queen Anneâ€™s Gate London SW1H 9AT
                                    (Night line 01 - 2 7 3 4595)
                                    Contact N u m b e r :


                        HILLSBOROUGH TRAGEDY

                 STATEMENT BY THE HOME SECRETARY


Commenting today on the publication of Lord Justice Taylor's
report, the Home Secretary, the Rt Hon Douglas Hurd CBE MP said:-

"i am grateful to Lord Justice Taylor and his team for completing
the first part of his inquiry in time to produce an interim report
before the start of the football season.

Mlt is an excellent   report which pulls no punches         about the causes
of the disaster.

"The Government welcomes the thoroughness of the report and its
recommendations. They include a number of matters which should be
dealt with without delay pending the longer-term findings of the
inquiry which will be published in the final report.

"A Home Office circular* is to be sent out immediately to local
authorities, the police, football clubs and others concerned with
the organisation of football matches, urging them to take action
on the report's recommendations so as to putas many of them into
effect as possible before the beginning of the season. Similar
steps are being taken by the Secretary of State for Scotland.

"I am satisfied that the interim report has not identified any
major shortcomings in the law on safety in sports grounds, though
clearly the Government will look at the Safety of Sports Grounds
Act and the Home Office and Scottish Office guide to safety at
sports grounds ( The Green Guide) in the light of the inquiry.

"Most of the problems which contributed to the disaster at
Hillsborough had been recognised in the past. The report reveals
serious shortcomings in applying those lessons on the part of the
police, of the club and of the local authority responsible for
the safety certificate.

"The report reveals clearly that there are major deficiencies in
the layout and organisation of the Hillsborough ground which
should have been recognised and corrected."




* A copy of the circular is attached.
The South Yorkshire Police


"It will be for the Chief Constable in the first instance to
consider the conduct of individual officers and the South
Yorkshire Police collectively in the light of the inquiry and the
investigation carried out by the West Midlands Police. I shall
look to the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire initially for a
report on the action he proposes to take."


Supervision of Safety Certificates

"Powers recently proposed by the Government in the Football
Spectators Bill will permit the setting up of a new authority
with powers to supervise the way in which local authorities carry
out their responsibilities for the safety of sports grounds if in
due course this is considered necessary in the light of Lord
Justice Taylor's final report.

"The tragedy would not have occurred if lessons learnt in the
past had been properly applied. It is for everyone concerned to
ensure they are applied in the future."
Note to Editors

Following the disaster at Hillsborough stadium on April 15, when
95 people were killed, Lord Justice Taylor was appointed by the
Home Secretary

"To inquire into the events at Sheffield Wednesday football
ground on April 15 1989 and to make recommendations about the
needs of crowd control and safety at sports events."

Lord Justice Taylor was assisted by two Assessors: Mr Brian
Johnson QPM, Chief Constable of Lancashire, and Professor Leonard
Maunder OBE, Professor of Mechanical Engineering at the University
of Newcastle upon Tyne. The secretary of the Inquiry was Mr Robert
Whalley from the Home Office. The investigation of the disaster
and the gathering of evidence was carried out by the West Midlands
Police under their Chief Constable Mr Geoffrey Dear, who appointed
Assistant Chief Constable Mervyn Jones to take full time charge of
the investigation. Counsel for the Inquiry were led by Mr Andrew
Collins QC. Technical tests and studies were carried out at the
Health and Safety Executive's     Research andLaboratory Services
Division in Sheffield.

The hearing began on May 15 in Sheffield Town Hall, and continued
for 31 days concluding on June 29. 174 witnesses gave oral
evidence. Transcripts of the evidence came to over 3,800 pages,
and some one and a half million  words in all. Lord Justice Taylor
also received some 1550 letters.
