                                                 c:   Mr Boys Smith




Mr F Smith




TAYLOR INQUIRY:   WRITTEN EVIDENCE FROM ACPO AND HOME OFFICE
RESPONSE


Thank you for your minute of 3 July.

2.   ACPO1s most positive points about the training of police
commanders, the management of crowds and a clearer understanding
of who is in charge are all welcome.

3.   As to the emphasis given to hooliganism, the police are
entitled to their own perspective and are right to be aware of
the potential (sometime actual) conflict between concern with
hooliganism and concern for safety.

4.   Annex F and the correspondence with the Home Office there is
innocuous.   As to copying Lord Ferrers' letter of 13 June to
Lord Harris, I am not generally in favour of copying to third
parties without the knowledge and consent of the principal
recipient. And I want to get away from appearing to negotiate/
consult with ACPO through Lord Harris.  It is unfortunate that we
ever got into this position and I have no wish to sustain this
procedure.  I would prefer to allow Mr Anderton and ACPO to know
the views expressed in Lord Ferrers' letter without copying it to
them. This could be done by a precis removed from the context of
the Lord Harris correspondence.

5.   As to clearing our minds on the tone and content of any
response we need to make to the interim Taylor report, we should
have a more constructive discussion if we could obtain from
Mr Whalley some idea of the report's probable content.  I shall
be speaking to him about this as soon as possible.  If we are
unable to see clearly the way ahead on this this week - which may
well be the case â€” I shall see that you are left written guidance
before I go on leave so that you have some steer when you return
to the Office on 24 July.




                                   J L GODDARD
                                   4 July 1989
