                                              cc   Mr Chilcot
                                                   Mr Boys Smith
                                                   Mr Nagler FD2
                                                   Mr Whalley F6
                                                   Mr Durbin FD2
                                                   Mr Waghorn
                                                    (w/o encs)

Mr Addison

COSTS OF HIIiSBOROUGH ENQUIRIES

We have been asked for urgent advice and draft replies to the two
attached letters from, respectively, West Midlands and South
Yorkshire, asking for financial assistance with the costs of the
enquiry.

2.   There are two aspects to the enquiries being conducted by
West Midlands. One would be to assist South Yorkshire in looking
at any complaints about the conduct of their officers. The other
would be to look at more general issues on which the West
Midlands would report directly to Lord Justice Taylor.

3.   I do not know to what extent we can differentiate between
the two strands of the enquiry in practice. West Midlands are
suggesting that the request to conduct enquiries covering both
aspects went direct to them from the Home Secretary. I do not
know to what extent they can substantiate this claim. I tried to
discuss this with Mr Whalley but received a message from his
office that he had already spoken to you.

4.   As ^emerged from our consultation with counsel over the legal
proceedings being brought against us by Avon and Somerset in
respect of the Guildford and Woolwich bombings enquiries, if we
ask an "outside" police force to conduct enquiries into events
which took place in another police area (as opposed to addressing
our request to the chief officer of the area where the events
occurred and suggesting that he approach on outside force) we
create a contract for services. We are then obliged to pay
'reasonable' costs of the enquiry. West Midlands have asked for
additional costs including consequential overtime in their force
area to cover for the officers involved, which could be regarded
as reasonable.

5.   Insofar as enquiries were initiated by the Chief Constable
of South Yorkshire, his police authority would be obliged to pay
as part of the policing costs for their police area. They have
asked for a "special payment" to cover their anticipated costs of
£im.  (It is not clear if this forms part of the £lm West
Midlands are asking for).

6.   The criteria for making a "special payment" are that the
costs are both unforeseen (as they are in this case) and
excessive, such as to threaten the efficiency of the policing of
the area. We usually look at whether the anticipated costs are
likely to exceed the product of a penny rate for the area. Fin
Div 2 will be able to say what this is for South Yorkshire, but
on the face of it the costs are likely to be well below that. We
also have to seek Treasury approval. They are likely to take a
tough line eg they have just queried a proposed payment to Kent
for the Seaman's dispute where costs were well in excess of a
penny rate product.

7.   It seems we need to establish:

     a.   To what extent does the Home Office take responsibility
          for the enquiries being conducted by West Midlands.
          Can costs be apportioned separately for our part?
     b.   To the extent that we do accept responsibility we will
          need to consider budgeting provision (there is
          currently none), basis of payment (they will probably
          ask for the new mutual aid terms), and need for
          Treasury approval.

     c.   Can South Yorkshire have a 'special payment' for their
          part of the enquiry? On the face of it, this looks a
          poor candidate. Anticipated costs of £im likely to be
          well below product of a penny rate. Already get 51%
          police grant on their costs (even if these are net
          costs they are still of the order we would normally
          expect forces to absorb).

8.   I am sorry not to have been able to take this further before
my departure for Central Conference followed by leave. As West
Midlands have asked for an early reply you may want to have a
work with their clerk (as requested) before the Police Authority
meeting at 10.30am on Thursday 27 Aprils You may also wish to
discuss this issue with Mr Nagler and Mr Whalley.
9.   A note to Private Office offering interim replies is
probably desirable. Mr Waghorn can assist if necessary (and
holds our papers).




                                             P RANSFORD
                                             26 April 1989
FI Division
                                                         Gop-(


                                             cc   Mr Chilcot
                                                  Mr Boys Smith
                                                  Mr Nagler FD2
                                                  Mr Whalley F6
                                                  Mr Durbin FD2
                                                  Mr Waghorn
                                                   (w/o encs)

Mr Addison

COSTS OF HIIiLSBOROUGH ENQUIRIES

We have been asked for urgent advice and draft replies to the two
attached letters from, respectively, West Midlands and South
Yorkshire, asking for financial assistance with the costs of the
enquiry.

2.   There are two aspects to the enquiries being conducted by
West Midlands. One would be to assist South Yorkshire in looking
at any complaints about the conduct of their officers. The other
would be to look at more general issues on which the West
Midlands would report directly to Lord Justice Taylor.
3.   I do not know to what extent we can differentiate between
the two strands of the enquiry in practice. West Midlands are
suggesting that the request to conduct enquiries covering both
aspects went direct to them from the Home Secretary. I do not
know to what extent they can substantiate this claim. I tried to
discuss this with Mr Whalley but received a message from his
office that he had already spoken to you.

4.   As emerged from our consultation with counsel over the legal
proceedings being brought against us by Avon and Somerset in
respect of the Guildford and Woolwich bombings enquiries, if we
ask an "outside" police force to conduct enquiries into events
which took place in another police area (as opposed to addressing
our request to the chief officer of the area where the events
occurred and suggesting that he approach on outside force) we
create a contract for services. We are then obliged to pay
'reasonable' costs of the enquiry. West Midlands have asked for
additional costs including consequential overtime in their force
area to cover for the officers involved, which could be regarded
as reasonable.

5.   Insofar as enquiries were initiated by the Chief Constable
of South Yorkshire, his police authority would be obliged to pay
as part of the policing costs for their police area. They have
asked for a "special payment" to cover their anticipated costs of
£im.  (It is not clear if this forms part of the £lm West
Midlands are asking for).

6.   The criteria for making a "special payment" are that the
costs are both unforeseen (as they are in this case) and
excessive, such as to threaten the efficiency of the policing of
the area. We usually look at whether the anticipated costs are
likely to exceed the product of a penny rate for the area. Fin
Div 2 will be able to say what this is for South Yorkshire, but
on the face of it the costs are likely to be well below that. We
also have to seek Treasury approval. They are likely to take a
tough line eg they have just queried a proposed payment to Kent
for the Seaman's dispute where costs were well in excess of a
penny rate product.

7.   It seems we need to establish:

          To what extent does the Home Office take responsibility
          for the enquiries being conducted by West Midlands.
          Can costs be apportioned separately for our part?
          To the extent that we do accept responsibility we will
          need to consider budgeting provision (there is
          currently none), basis of payment (they will probably
          ask for the new mutual aid terms), and need for
          Treasury approval.

          Can South Yorkshire have a 'special payment' for their
          part of the enquiry? On the face of it, this looks a
          poor candidate. Anticipated costs of £im likely to be
          well below product of a penny rate. Already get 51%
          police grant on their costs (even if these are net
          costs they are still of the order we would normally
          expect forces to absorb).

8.   I am sorry not to have been able to take this further before
my departure for Central Conference followed by leave. As West
Midlands have asked for an early reply you may want to have a
work with their clerk (as requested) before the Police Authority
meeting at 10.30am on Thursday 27 April.* You may also wish to
discuss this issue with Mr Nagler and Mr Whalley.
9.   A note to Private Office offering interim replies is
probably desirable. Mr Waghorn can assist if necessary (and
holds our papers).




                                            P RANSFORD
                                            26 April 1989
FI Division
