                        if



19-11.JS
                    /                         cc:   Mr Boys Smith
                                                    HMCIC
                                                    Mr Whalley




Mr Chilcot




HILLSBOROUGH - HOUSE OF COMMONS VIDEO PRESENTATION



On 6 November I received your minute about a forthcoming video
presentation in the House of Commons (date not known) at which
a Superintendent of the South Yorkshire Police was to present
extracts of video tape footage from the Hillsborough disaster.
I am afraid that I started off on one or two false trails
before finding the information I needed.


2.   On 9 November our enquiries (tactful I believe) of the
South Yorkshire Police revealed that the video presentation
took place on the afternoon of 8 November when 12 MPs
attended.    It appears that the House of Commons presentation
was arranged by Mr Shersby who, in his capacity as adviser to
the Police Federation^had seen some 30 minutes of the video
tape when he was attending a meeting at South Yorkshire Police
Headquarters to discuss possible prosecutions of Federation
members following Hillsborough.


3.   Our source in the South Yorkshire Police, the Chief
Constable's Staff Officer, told us that Mr Shersby, who left
the presentation for a short while to attend a previously
arranged meeting with the Home Secretary, indicated on his
return that the Home Secretary had expressed some interest in
seeing the video.


4.   The Chief Constable's Staff Officer, perhaps anticipating
that we might suspect that South Yorkshire Police were anxious
to present their side of the Hillsborough disaster case to
MPs, made a point of telling us that at the presentation the
Superintendent gave a purely factual account of events shown
on the video.




                            J. L GODDARD

                              J L GODDARD
                            10 November 1989


F8 Division
Queen Anne's Gate
c(? s&
