                          C ^U   -H    -fcoi   IV   U ^ J U -,               Vut

                                 ^73*-Â® 'r               ^       W*~w   t^ sv r

                         **                    O aut *L
LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR

You asked me to enquire into two matters raised by Lord Justice
Taylor. The results of my inquiries are shown below. In
considering what is said it needs to be borne in mind that Lords
Justices have no entitlement to allowances in the Lord
Chancellor1s Department.
2.   THE PIANO

Had Lord Justice Taylor been a circuit judge living in judges1
quarters he would have received no assistance from Lord
Chancellor's Department with the piano. This is because as a
circuit judge he would be on circuit for 90 days each year. For
the remainder of the year he would be expected to live at home.
However, the position as far as Lord Justice Taylor is concerned
is somewhat different. Whilst he will be living in judges'
quarters it may be assumed that he will spend rather more than 90
days there in the course of the next year. In these
circumstances I think it would be proper for us to say that we
would be prepared to meet all reasonable expenses in connection
with the piano. I have discussed this possibility with Lord
Chancellor's Department (Mr Wilkinson on 210 8642) and have been
assured that were we to meet these expenses it would cause no
problems for them.

3-   TRAVELLING EXPENSES OF LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR'S WIFE

Again, comparing Lord Justice Taylor's situation to that of a
circuit judge, he would not receive travelling expenses for his
wife if he were a circuit judge living in judge's quarters.
Circuit judges receive a daily allowance whilst living in judges'
quarters. This is intended to cover such items as food, costs of
staff and entertainment. If a circuit judge wished to have his
wife with him in judges' quarters it would be permissible but no
payment of travelling expenses in respect of the wife would be
allowed. However, Lord Justice Taylor's position is rather
different. As a Lord Justice he has no entitlement to allowances
and cannot therefore cover the costs of his wife's travel from
these. We would need to be assured that it was not the intention
for Lord Justice Taylor's wife to travel frequently to and from
Sheffield but provided we had that assurance my view is that we
should pay reasonable travelling expenses.




Finance Division 1
Queen Anne's Gate

        9 May 1989
Mr Whalley


HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY


1.   I am writing to confirm what I told you earlier today in
response to questions you had put to me about incidental
expenditure related to Lord Justice Taylor's inquiry into the
Hillsborough disaster.

2.   I would be content that reasonable expenses should be met
from financial provision for the inquiry to enable Lord Justice
Taylor to have the use of a piano in judges' lodgings at
Sheffield.   I would also be content for costs to be met from
provision for the inquiry for occasional travel by Lord Justice
Taylor's wife to and from Sheffield to join Lord Justice Taylor
in judges' lodgings.    As we discussed, this is on the basis
that such travel would be occasional only, and not a standing
arrangement.



                               G r-


                         G K SANDIFORD
                           9 May 1989

Finance Division 1
Queen Anne's Gate
