Mr Scholev

HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY

I am due to attend a meeting on 18 May with the South Yorkshire
Police Authority to discuss the investigations which the West
Midlands Police are carrying out into South Yorkshire's policing
of the event.
                                            i

2.   The Home Office will be paying from central funds the cost
of Lord Justice Taylor's public inquiry.  But the police
investigations are a separate matter. They were initiated at the
request of South Yorkshire Police and the conventional wisdom has
it that South Yorkshire should pay for them. Assurances have
been given that West Midlands will not have to meet the cost.

3.   South Yorkshire are likely to argue strongly that the Home
Office should meet the cost on the grounds that the police
investigations are integral to the inquiry.   The disposition
seems to be to resist that argument.   If South Yorkshire have to
pay, I imagine that at some stage the possibility of special
grant will arise.   I would therefore find it helpful to have a
background note setting out the criteria that have been used in
the past for payment of special grant to police forces in recent
years.   I would also like to have figures illustrating what the
application of those criteria might mean in the case of South
Yorkshire in the current year.   In other words, using past
criteria, what would be the threshold for payment of special
grant, and how would total costs then be apportioned between the
local authority and central government (including RSG
contributions)?

4.    It would be helpful to receive your note bv the end of the
week.




                                   N A NAGLER



FINANCE DIVISION 2

9 May 1989
