                      DERBY SENIOR ATTENDANCE CENTRE


                                      Home Office Senior Attendance Centre,
                                      Central Police Station,
                                      Full Street,
                                      Derby.

Your Ref: CHN90 401/11/3              23rd February, 1990.


Dear Sir,

    Attendance Centres - Inquiry into the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster

     In  reply   to  your   letter  of   7th   February, 1990, concerning
recommendations made in Chapter II of the report by the Rt. Hon. Lord
Justice Taylor I offer the following comments.

     The attractiveness of utilising a relatively cheap, readily available
and viable means to deal with 'football hooligans' is apparent, but I do
foresee difficulties in the utilisation of Attendance Centres as they exist

     As detailed in the recommendations Attendance Centres could not cater
for weekly, midweek or Sunday attendance, without changes to basic
structures and arrangements.

     Legislation appertaining to Attendance Centre Orders would need to be
strengthened and widened with the introduction of 'penalties' for failing
to attend as required and a more streamlined and effective system for
bringing non-attenders back before the courts.   A power to arrest in such
cases would I am sure prove most effective and beneficial.

     Staff resources will be a problem with many being reluctant to give up
every Saturday afternoon.   It may be necessary to employ two staff groups
on alternate Saturdays.

     Would attenders   convicted of    'football associated offences'  be
required to attend Centres at any time throughout the year or would their
orders be restricted to the football season only?

     Greater problems and difficulties would I am sure be experienced by
staff when dealing with the the older and perhaps more violent type of
'offender' and I would not want to see the existing regime disrupted.   It
might, therefore, be necessary to establish an 'offshoot' or annexe centre
to cater specifically for 'football hooligans.'

     As an observation, during my six years as Officer in Charge of a
Junior and Senior Centre I cannot recall even one boy being subject to an
order for 'football related' offences.




                                                             /cont'd
4 â– >




                                    -   2-



     I accept   in 'principle'   the recommendations but in reality a
considerable amount of consideration, evaluation and changes will have to
be made to make the proposals workable and effective.

                              Yours faithfully,




                                 H .R . Hopkinson
                                 Chief Inspector
                                 Officer in Charge
