                                             cc.   Mr Chilcot
                                                   Mr Addison
                                                   Mr Soden




Mr Bovs Smith


CRIMINAL AND DISCIPLINARY INVESTIGATIONS STEMMING FROM THE
HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER


Further to my note of 5th September 1989, Mr Geoffrey Dear was
contacted on 4th September 1989 and has stated his position
which, for the time being, takes the heat out of the situation.
The criminal investigation and associated work connected with the
Coroner's Inquest will continue without reservations.  Discipline
notices will be served upon appropriate officers by Mr Kenneth
Cooper, Assistant Chief Constable of Northamptonshire, to
safeguard this aspect of the inquiry. No action can be taken
about the complaint made against Mr Walter Jackson, Assistant
Chief Constable of South Yorkshire, until the South Yorkshire
Police Authority has considered it. It is likely that Mr Dear
will be asked to handle this inquiry along with those requested
by the Chief Constable. However as Mr Dear is under restraint
from his Police Authority not to accept any additional inquiries
until the financial aspects of the Taylor Inquiry has been
resolved to their satisfaction this will not be pursued. No
embarrassment will be caused because the criminal allegations
would receive priority over the disciplinary matters in any case.

No action seems to be called for for the time being.   Mr Wright
is aware of the position and is now content.




                       7th September 1989
