                                    cc Ms    Snow
                                       Ms    Spencer
                                       Mr    Yates
                                       Mr    Chilcot
                     V                 Mr    Moriarty
                                       Mr    Boys Smith
                                       Mr    Turney
                                       Mr    Gilbert
                                       Mr    Bolton


                                        Mr   Martin
                                        Mr   Mould
                                        Mr   Smith,, F8
                                        Mr   Godfrey

                                             >

Mr Walters

HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY FINAL REPORT

I have seen Mr Gilbert's note of 24 January which,
unfortunately (my fault!), I was unable to comment on
yesterday.

He questions whether we should make confidential final revises
available to press. With such a bulky document we should come
under great pressure and be subject to a lot of criticism as a
department if we were not able to give the press some time to
prepare; this would be particularly true of the evening
papers, those in Sheffield and Liverpool, of course, but more
generally also.  I should be prepared to take this flak if it
were in our overall interests and indeed my initial view was
that we should provide CFRs only an hour or so before
publication (perhaps with some covert help to Liverpool and
Sheffield).  The situation has changed however.  Given the
exposure already given to the demise of the membership scheme,
it is in our interest to ensure that the media give as full as
possible a treatment to the report's wider comments and
recommendations.

I propose, therefore, that we should make CFRs available as
early as we reasonably can which will probably be late on
Monday morning.  Given that Parliament is familiar with this
system, I think it unlikely that there would be a sustainable
criticism if the embargo should be broken in some way.




                                       B L Mower
                                       PRB


26 January 1990
