                                              cc   Mr   Moriarty
                                                   Mr   Malone-Lee
                                                   Mr   Turney
                                                   Mr   Sandiford
                                                   Mr   Watts (Gl)
                                                   Mr   Whalley


Mr F J Archer
Gl Division


HILLSBOROUGH


We spoke briefly about the arrangements for meeting the cost of
the enquiry and about the payment of the Government donation to
the disaster appeal fund.  I have since spoken to the Treasury.

2. On the costs of the enquiry, Treasury agree that the
Popplewell precedent should be followed in that we ought to take
a revised estimate to allow the Vote ambit to be extended to
cover the costs of the enquiry. Although the revised estimate
will have to set down the full cost of the enquiry, this will not
amount to an increase in Vote provision since we shall have to
give an undertaking to find the costs within the present
estimates.  Details of the revise have to be with Treasury by 2
May.  I should be grateful, therefore, if an estimate of the cost
of the enquiry could reach us by Thursday 27 April at the latest.


3. We shall clearly need to consider with you where the money
for the enquiry will be found. We shall initially, I fear, have
to look at Mr Moriarty1s budget but I do not think we need to
settle that immediately.

4. Turning to the Home Secretary's announcement that Government
intended to contribute Â£500,000 to the disaster appeal fund, I
have asked Treasury to consider precedent for such payments.
Their initial (but very strong) view was that the payment should
be found from the Department of Environment Vote as the Vote
responsible for the work of the Minister for Sport.  I understand
that that was the source of the funds for the Government
contribution to the Bradford fire disaster fund. Treasury have
undertaken to confirm this with me as soon as they can.  I shall
let you know the outcome.




                                             B R Gange
Finance Division 1
Queen Anne1s Gate

                                             18 April 1989
     01 273 3323
