Revised draft:   February *91

A BILL TO CREATE FURTHER OFFENCES IN CONNECTION WITH
ASSOCIATION FOOTBALL MATCHES

TDraftl Instructions to Parliamentary Counsel

            Part I:   Introduction, scope and extent

1.1 These Instructions set out proposals for the creation of
four new offences which should apply only at or in relation to
asE^Plation football matches. The instructions are broadly
based on the proposals of Lord Justice Taylor in Chapters 7
and 9 of his final report into the Hillsborough Stadium
disaster. A copy of that report (Cm 962) is attached to these
Instructions. The proposals for the offence of ticket touting
(Chapter 7 of the Taylor Final Report) are set out in Part II
of these Instructions. Proposals for the three remaining
offences (proposed in Chapter 9 of the Taylor Final Report)
are dealt with together in Part III of these Instructions. In
addition, Part IV of these Instructions sets out proposals for
a correction to the Football Spectators Act 1989 (c.37).


1.2 Counsel may be aware that consequent on the report of the
Home Affairs Select Committee entitled "Policing Football
Hooliganism", the chairman of that Committee (Sir John Wheeler
MP) has tabled a Bill entitled "the Football (Offences) Bill
1991". A copy of that Bill is attached for Counsel's
information. The Bill sets out to create offences to give
effect to the proposals in Chapter 9 of the Taylor Final
Report. However, in various respects the Bill's approach
seems to be unduly simplistic. For this reason it is proposed
to introduce a Government Bill to give effect to the proposals
in both Chapter 9 and Chapter 7 (proposals in relation to
ticket touting) of the Taylor Final Report rather than attempt
to amend the Bill introduced by Sir John Wheeler.
1.3 As noted above, the offences should apply only in
relation to association football matches, notwithstanding that
there may be pressure to extend the offences to other sporting
events. However, it is not proposed that the Bill's offences
should apply on every occasion when association football is
played. It is proposed instead that certain descriptions of
matches should be designated for the purposes of this Bill.
One means of achieving this would be to provide that the
description of matches to which the offences in the Bill
should apply are those for the time being designated under
section 1(2) of the Football Spectators Act 1989. This
prt^lsal resembles clause 1(1)(a) of the Wheeler Bill.
Alternatively, if Counsel considers the first approach to be
unsatisfactory, provision could be included in the Bill
corresponding to section 1(2) and (10) of the 1989 Act. The
first order under any such power would make provision
corresponding to that currently made under section 1(2) of the
1989 Act. The same designation should apply for all of the
four offences proposed in these Instructions.


1.4 Under the Wheeler Bill, the proposed offences should
apply in England and Wales only.


                    Part II:   Ticket Touts


2.1 Counsel is referred, by way of background, to paragraphs
273 to 278 of the Taylor Final Report. These describe the
problems which can be caused by ticket touts at association
football matches and (in paragraph 276) why touting elsewhere
does not create the same problems. Paragraph 279 sets out
three possible offences directed at touts. This Part of these
Instructions contains proposals broadly directed at giving
effect to the first of those possible offences: that is, sale
of tickets in a public place or place to which the public have
access, on the day of a designated football match without due
authority.



                                                             2
<




    2.2 One of the main purposes of the proposed offence is to
    reduce the potential for disorder resulting from the
    expectation that tickets will be available from touts outside
    football grounds. This expectation attracts large groups of
    supporters without tickets to attend at the vicinity of the
    ground causing obstruction and, as the ticket supply fails,
    frustration which are conducive to disorder. In addition,
    since the sale of tickets by touts potentially weakens the
    segregation of fans, the proposed offence will also help to
    prevent such weakening.

    2.3^^The proposed offence should consist of selling or
    offering for sale tickets for certain association football
    matches on the day of the match in question without the
    necessary consent to do so (as to which see paragraph 2.7
    below). The matches to which the offence should apply are
    those of a designated description: see paragraph 1.3 above.

    2.4 The essential feature of the proposed offence is selling
    tickets or offering or exposing them for sale. It should not
    be necessary to prove that money actually changed hands (cf.
    section 196(1) of the Licensing Act 1964 (c.26)). It is
    recognised that such an offence may not be wholly effective in
    catching all touts. An offence of possession of tickets with
    the intention of selling them would allow the police to act
    against a person they believed to be a tout but who is not
    actually displaying any tickets and has not been seen to have
    sold any. However, the disadvantage of such an offence is the
    difficulty of proving intention and it is therefore not what
    is required.

    2.5 It is not proposed that the offence should be restricted
    to the vicinity of the ground at which the match is played.
    If, for example, it became known that touts operated from a
    particular area in Central London fans might buy tickets there
    prior to travelling to the ground and the segregation of fans
    would thereby be disrupted.   The Bill should provide that the


                                                                     3
offence is to be committed if the selling or offering for sale
or display of tickets takes place in a public place or a place
to which members of the public have access, so as to ensure
that touts cannot operate from places such as public houses,
cafes or shops (being places to which the public have access).

2.6 Since it is proposed that the offence can be committed
only in a public place or place to which the public have
access, a fan who, for example, has become ill on the day of
the match and sells his ticket at his home address to a friend
will^not be caught by the proposed offence. It is possible
th^Pthe proposed requirement that the offence must be
committed in a public place or place to which the public have
access will allow certain touts to operate from their own
homes or some other place to which the public in general do
not have access. However, such practices are not seen as
posing a widespread threat and, in any event, it is doubtful
whether it would be politically acceptable to extend the place
where this proposed offence can be committed to private
premises.


2.7 Apparently it is not unusual for football clubs to have
authorised agents to sell tickets both before and on the day
of a match (where the match is not all ticket) in addition to
the clubs themselves. It is necessary to ensure that such
agents are not caught by the proposed new offences.
Accordingly, the Bill should ensure that a person who has the
necessary consent in writing to sell tickets falls outside the
offence. However, it is not sufficient to take up the
suggestion in paragraph 279 of the Taylor Final Report that
the authority should be that of the home club since the semiÂ­
finals of the FA Cup are played on neutral grounds and the
final is played at Wembley. Such matches are organised by the
Football Association, although some others are organised by
the Football League. However, whilst matches may be organised
by different bodies, it would be clear who organised a
particular match, and this could be proved in court if the


                                                             4
matter become an issue. Accordingly, it seams preferable for
the Bill to refer to the organisers of the game or match in
question rather than use the narrower suggestion put forward
in the Taylor Final Report.


2.8 The Bill should provide that a person guilty of this
proposed offence is liable on summary conviction to a fine not
exceeding level 5 on the standard scale.


2.9 The Bill should confer a power on a constable to arrest
witJ^ut warrant a person whom the constable believes, on
re^Rnable grounds,is committing or has committed the proposed
offence.

2.10 The Bill should confer a power on the constable to
search any person he has arrested under the power proposed in
paragraph 2.9 above. It is submitted that a specific power of
search needs to be conferred by the Bill since the
restrictions on the general power of search conferred by
section 32 of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (c.60)
mean that it would not be of use in relation to ticket touts
(for example, there can be no suggestion that a ticket tout is
a danger to others for the purposes of section 32(1)). It
should also confer a power on the constable to confiscate from
any person arrested under that power any tickets to a match
which is designated under the proposals in paragraph 1.3
above, where the match takes place on that day. The power of
search should also extend to any motor vehicle which the
constable reasonably believes the arrested person is using
(and any tickets found should be liable to confiscation).
Where, however, the arrested person operates from premises to
which the public have access (for example, a cafe or public
house) but which do not belong to him, the power of search
should not extend to those premises.




                                                               5
                  Part III:   Other offences

3.1 Counsel is referred to Chapter 9 of the Taylor Final
Report. This Part of these Instructions attempts to set out
proposals to create offences in respect of the three
activities listed in paragraph 289 of that Report (throwing
missiles; offensive chants and running on the pitch).

3.2 The Government accepts that these activities should be
covered by specific offences rather than by introducing into
th<^^aw of England and Wales an offence equivalent to the
Scottish common law offence of disorderly conduct or breach of
the peace (see paragraph 290 of the Report). In addition to
the argument about deterrence which is set out in paragraph
299 of the Report, the vagueness of an offence such as
"disorderly conduct" is unsatisfactory in that the potential
offender does not have a clear idea as to whether or not be is
breaking the law.

3.3 Nevertheless, the proposed new offences about missiles
and chanting are very much directed at anti-social or
disorderly behaviour rather than behaviour which necessarily
harms others. It is this aspect that differentiates the
proposed new offences from the existing offences in sections
4, 5 and 18 of the Public Order Act 1986 (c.64). For
instance, the conduct which it is proposed to cover with the
new offence in respect of chanting might not actually stir up
racial hatred (see section 18(1)), but it is conduct that is
liable to give offence. The various sorts of anti-social
behaviour at which the proposed new offences are directed are
especially prevalent at certain association football matches
and are fraught with potentially disorderly consequences. It
is for this reason that the Government proposes to depart from
the view implicit in the Report (see paragraphs 290, 291 and
3 01) that the offences should apply at most sports grounds,
and to limit the place where the offences can be committed to



                                                                6
those grounds where association football matches of the
designated description (see paragraph 1.3 above) are played.

3.4 The proposed offences go further than the existing law in
the type of conduct that is made unlawful. The justification
for so doing lies in the type of conduct prevalent at certain
association football matches, since that conduct is not
prevalent at other sporting events, the justification for the
extended offences does not exist in relation to them. The
offences are not solely public order offences; they are as
mucy^concerned with the bad behaviour of football fans,
alt^reugh that behaviour may have public order consequences.

Throwing of missiles
3.5 Paragraphs 293 and 294 of the Report refer to the
existing offences in sections 4 and 5 of the Public Order Act
1986 and point out briefly why these offences are regarded as
being too narrow. Section 4(1) (read with the definition of
"violence" in section 8) would cover the throwing of missiles
but only if it is done in the circumstances set out at the end
of section 4(1). Those additional elements would make it
difficult to prosecute under section 4(1) someone standing on
an upper terrace who showered persons below with coins. It
might also be difficult to secure a conviction under section
5(1) of the Public Order Act 1986. Whilst it might not be as
difficult to establish that a person whose head bears the
brunt of a torrent of coins has been caused "distress" as
paragraph 294 implies (if the head is unprotected and the
coins descend with sufficient force the pain would outweigh
the delight at the unexpected largesse), the recipient might
be out of sight of the donor and the conditions in section
5(1) would therefore not be satisfied.


3.6 The Government therefore agrees with the Report's
conclusion that it should be sufficient for a missile to be
thrown without the need to show that it was directed at a
particular person or that anyone is likely to be alarmed or


                                                               7
 distressed thereby. Indeed, for the reasons set out below, the
 proposed offence should (subject to certain exceptions) cover
 the throwing of any object and not just "missiles". The
 Concise Oxford Dictionary (1990 edition) defines "missile" as
 "an object or weapon suitable for throwing at a target or for
 discharge from a machine". It is not clear whether this would
 cover coin throwing, but (in accordance with paragraph 289 of
 the Report) such activity should be covered by the proposed
 offence.


 3.7 Nor should the proposed offence cover only the throwing
 of^^jects of a kind capable of causing injury (cf. the
 definition of violence in section 8 of the Public Order Act
 1986). Recommendation 15 of the Taylor Final Report (see page
 77) proposes the lowering of the perimeter fences around the
 pitch. But this will make pitches more vulnerable to
 spectators throwing objects such as rolls of lavatory paper
 onto it. Whilst such objects may not be dangerous, the
 throwing of them is offensive and, in sufficient quantity,
 they could be a nuisance. The same remarks apply if such
 rolls are thrown at other spectators. Various things are
 thrown at rival spectators on the terraces. Amongst the most
 disgusting are plastic bags filled with urine.


 3.8   There is one particular practice that is sadly prevalent
 at football matches which it is hoped to catch by this
  proposed offence. This is the practice of throwing whole or
  partially eaten bananas at black players when they appear on
  the pitch or at black spectators. Apparently banana skins are
  also thrown but, from the nature of things, they are not
 -likely to travel very far. The objection to this activity
  lies in the fact that it is racially offensive (presumably
  those perpetrating it are seeking to draw some comparison with
* the eating habits of apes in the jungle). However, the
  activity is so juvenile and just plain silly that it could
 hardly be argued that racial hatred is liable to be stirred up



                                                               8
    by it. Accordingly, it is not caught by the offence in
    section 18 of the Public Order Act 1986.
/
 3.9 Detailed consideration was given as to how best to
 prohibit the throwing of objects such as those described in
 paragraphs 3.7 and 3.8 above: that is objects which are not
 likely to cause physical injury. One possibility was to refer
 to the throwing of objects which caused or would be likely to
 cause offence, either on racial grounds or on grounds of
 public decency, to a reasonable person present at the ground.
 But^the subjective element in this approach is liable to
 prv^Ptce inconsistencies; for example, one bench of magistrates
 might regard the throwing of a roll of lavatory paper as
 offending public decency whilst another might not. Different
 views might also be taken on the throwing of bananas.


    3.10 It therefore seems preferable for the Bill to make it an
    offence for a person to throw any object at or towards the
 pitch or at or towards another person at a designated football
 match, subject to the exceptions set out in paragraph 3.11
 below. Paragraph 3.24 below sets out what is meant by
 "pitch". Since the essence of the offence consists of
 throwing objects at or towards another person or the pitch,
 conduct such as throwing one's hat in the air in celebration
 would fall outside the proposed offence, since the thrown
 object is not directed at the pitch or another person.


   3.11 It should not be an offence to throw the football or one
   of the footballs which is being used in the match (since at
   different times more than one ball may be used in a game) back
   at or towards the pitch. It should also not be an offence to
(' throw something (for example, a boiled sweet) at another
   spectator when this is done in a friendly manner. The object
  might be thrown because the recipient is out of reach of the
   donor. Subject to Counsel's views, the most satisfactory way
   of exempting such behaviour from the scope of the proposed
   offence would be to disapply the offence when the donor has


                                                                    9
the recipient's actual or implied consent to the thing being
thrown. It should be possible to imply consent even if, as it
happens, the recipient does not (for example) like boiled
[
sweets or does not want one at that particular time.

3.12 It is proposed that the penalty for the proposed offence
of throwing objects and the power of arrest in respect of it,
together with other ancillary provisions should be the same as
for the other offences proposed by Chapter 9 of the Final
Taylor Report. These aspects are dealt with together at the
en^^>f this Part of these Instructions.

Chanting
3.13 Paragraph 289 of the Taylor Final Report proposes the
offence of chanting obscene or racialist abuse. Paragraphs
295 to 298 of that Report explain why such activities could
not be prosecuted under sections 4, 5 or 18 of the Public
Order Act 1986. The next following paragraphs attempt to
describe the offence that the Bill should create. The only
place where the offence should be capable of being committed
is at a ground where an association football match of a
designated description is played: see paragraph 1.3 above.

3.14 It should be an essential feature of the proposed
offence that a number of persons are participating in the
"chant". An isolated shout is liable to be lost in the din
created by the crowd and it is not therefore proposed that
that should be caught. Furthermore, as is explained below,
one of the essential features in the proposed offence is that
the slogan, words or noise should be repeated several times
and should be loud. Nevertheless it should be possible to
prosecute a single individual for the proposed offence even
though proceedings are not brought against the other persons
participating in the chant.


3.15 The Concise Oxford Dictionary (1990 Edition) defines
"chant" when used as a verb as "talk or repeat monotonously".


                                                                10
This is a starting point for the offence that is envisaged,
although there are a number of refinements. The word "talk"
may be too limiting. The slogans may be shouted or (after a
fashion) sung. The word "monotonously" may imply too long a
span of time, although some degree of repetition should be an
essential element in the offence.


3.16 One sound which it is hoped to catch by the proposed
offence is the noise intended to resemble that believed to be
made by apes which sometimes accompanies those moments when a
bl^rtc player is in possession of the ball. There may be
diSRculties in describing this sound in the Bill. One word
that springs to mind is "grunt". However, this word is
defined, as a noun, by the Concise Oxford Dictionary as "l. a
low guttural sound made by a pig. 2. a sound resembling
this". The association the word has with pigs is misleading
in the present context. Possibly it might be more helpful to
concentrate on the guttural nature of the sound, the fact that
it is loud and repeated and the fact that it is designed to be
taunting or abusive towards black people. These three
elements are probably all important in identifying this
particular sound. Various members of the crowd may groan at
something that happens on the pitch and the groan is a
guttural sound. However, what differentiates the sound
described in this paragraph from such a sound is its
repetition and the fact that, by accompanying the moments when
a black player has possession of the ball, it is racially
directed.


3.17 In an attempt to find a neutral phrase the types of
sounds described in paragraphs 3.15 and 3.16 above are
described in these Instructions as "utterances". However,
that word by itself does not convey the requirement that
should be included in the Bill that the utterances should be
loud and repeated.




                                                               11
 3.18 The first type of utterance that should be made an
 offence by the Bill is one involving abuse on racial grounds.
 This offence should include not merely straightforward abuse
 but also the sort of taunting described in paragraph 3.16
 above.


  3.19 The second type of utterance is what is referred to in
  the Taylor Final Report and the Wheeler Bill as "obscene". It
  can be assumed that this should cover (amongst other things)
  the well known four letter swear words. As indicated in
  pa^graph 3.2 0 below, it is doubtful whether "obscene" is the
  apÂ®>priate description to refer to such words (in fairness to
  Sir John Wheeler, he acknowledged the difficulties with the
  word "obscene" in a latter to the Home Secretary). However,
  it might be thought that the proposal to make expressions such
  as "You f ...ing idiot" an offence at a designated football
  match might be attempting to create higher standards of
  behaviour for such matches than apply elsewhere (since such
  expressions are now fairly widely used). However, this is not
f the case. What the proposed offence is intended to cover is
  the loud and repeated chanting of such phrases and not an
  isolated remark or shout.


 3.20 It is for consideration whether "obscene" is the
 appropriate word to describe the second category of utterance
 to be prohibited by the Bill. In a legal context the test for
 obscenity is "the tendency to deprave and corrupt" (see
 section 1 of the Obscene Publications Act 1959 (c.66)). This
meaning is referred to in the Concise Oxford Dictionary (1990
Edition) which also defines the adjective "obscene" as "1.
offensively or repulsively indecent, esp. by offending
accepted sexual morality. 2. colloquial highly offensive or
repugnant (an obscene accumulation of w e a l t h clearly the
legal definition is inappropriate in this context. But even
the standard definition of the word "obscene" sets a test
which is unlikely to be met by chanting at football matches.
The chanting is offensive or simply indecent rather than
"repulsively indecent".


3.21 Those instructing Counsel are aware that it may well
prove difficult to bring a successful prosecution in respect
of this offence. Where a group of people are making a lot of
noise chanting, it may well be difficult for a constable to
convince the court that he identified the accused's voice
amidst the din in order to rebut the possible line of defence
that the accused was opening his mouth along with his
companions but no sound was coming forth. It is therefore
pr^^sed that the Bill should ensure that a person who is
actively participating in a group which is making utterances
which fall within this proposed offence should be guilty of
the offence. For these purposes a person is an active
participant if he opens and shuts his mouth along with the
other members of thegroup.

Going onto the pitch
3.22 Paragraphs 289 and 300 of the Taylor Final Report set
out the reasons for recommending an offence of going onto the
pitch without reasonable excuse. Paragraphs 3.24 to 3.27
below set out proposals for an offence broadly along the lines
therein suggested. The offence should be capable of being
committed only at a ground where a designated football match
is being played: see paragraph 1.3 above.


3.23 Paragraph 3.31 below sets out proposals for the times
during which the offences proposed in this Part of the
Instructions can be committed. Accordingly, this proposed
offence could be committed not only before and during a match,
but also after it has finished.


3.24 In the context of this proposed offence "the pitch"
means the pitch itself and any area around the pitch which
separates it from the accommodation for spectators. It should



                                                             13
accordingly include any area of grass around the pitch and,
for example, any running track around the edge of the pitch.

3.25 Obviously there are certain persons to whom the proposed
offence should not apply. These include the players,
referees, managers, coaches, linesmen, ball boys, the police,
any stewards at the ground, members of the emergency services,
disabled spectators sitting in wheelchairs in front of the
stands and press photographers. These persons should need the
authorisation of the match organisers, the ground authority,
the referee, the police or the emergency services to be on the
pi^^t. However, in the case of the players, officials
involved in the game, the police and stewards it is hoped that
the authorisation could be implied.

3.26 The Bill should not give effect to the proposal in
paragraph 301 of the Taylor Final Report which would allow
persons onto the pitch if they had "good reason or reasonable
excuse". These phrases seem to be too vague. Indeed the
wording of paragraph 301 seems to imply that persons who go
onto the pitch to "pat players on the back" should not commit
an offence. The difficulty with this approach is that a
defence of reasonable excuse might allow persons to falsely
claim that their intention when running onto the pitch had
been to congratulate the players. In this instance the
innocent manifestations of the ioie de vivre to which Taylor
refers in paragraph 3 01 need to be restricted to prevent the
mischief which he describes in paragraph 289(iii).

3.27 clearly, however, emergencies may occur when persons
other than those referred to in paragraph 3.25 above should be
able to go onto the pitch.   Counsel will wish to consider
whether this end should be achieved by providing a defence in
the Bill or by so framing the offence that it does not apply
in such circumstances. Broadly speaking, those circumstances
should either be an emergency or when persons are directed
onto the pitch by the police, stewards or other persons in


                                                               14
charge of the ground. An "emergency" should cover not only
serious disasters such as the events at Hillsborough or a fire
in the stands (as happened at Bradford in 1985) but also when,
for example, someone has a heart attack and needs to be laid
flat on the ground.


General provisions about penalties etc.
3.28 The Bill should provide that a person guilty of one of
the offences proposed in this Part of these Instructions
should be liable on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding
      3 on the standard scale.


3.29 Some of the offences in this Part of these Instructions
are directed at offensive racialist conduct and are therefore
close to the offences contained in Part III of the Public
Order Act 1986. Notwithstanding this, the Bill should not
contain a provision similar to section 27(1) of that Act
(which requires the Attorney General's consent for
prosecutions for offences in Part III of the 1986 Act). The
Attorney General has indicated that he does not wish to be
involved in the prosecution of these offences. Furthermore
the penalty proposed in paragraph 3.28 above is much less than
the penalties which apply under Part III of the Public Order
Act 1986.


3.3 0 The Bill should confer on a constable a power to arrest
without warrant a person whom the constable believes, on
reasonable grounds, is committing or has committed one of the
offences proposed in this Part. Unlike subsections (4) and
(5) of section 5 of the Public Order Act 1986 there should be
no requirement for the constable to give a warning before
actually arresting.


3.31 The Instructions have already mentioned that the
offences should be committed only at grounds where football
matches of a designated description are played. The Bill
should also ensure that the offences can only be committed


                                                              15
during the period surrounding the match. Provision equivalent
to section 31(6) of the Public Order Act 1986 is required for
this purpose. To cover the eventualities of persons being
admitted to a ground for a game which is postponed or
abandoned before its start, provision equivalent to section
31(7) and (8) is also required.


3.32 Sections 30 to 37 of the Public Order Act 1986 (which
constitute Part IV of that Act) provide for exclusion orders
to prevent persons convicted of offences to which section 31
of that Act applies from attending football matches of a
d^Pription prescribed for the purposes of Part IV of that
Act. These provisions were prospectively repealed by section
27(5) of the Football Spectators Act 1989 (c.37); however, the
repeals have not been brought into force following the
abandonment of football membership scheme provided for in Part
I of the 1989 Act. Where the offences proposed in this Part
of the Instructions have been committed at a football match
which has been prescribed under Part IV of the 1986 Act,
section 31 of the 1986 Act will apply to the offence because
the condition in section 31(2) will be satisfied. It will
therefore be possible for a court to make an exclusion order
under Part IV of the 1986 Act following conviction for one of
the offences proposed in this Part of the Instructions. As
this achieves the desired effect, no further provision need be
made by this Bill.


3.33 Exclusion orders under Part IV of the Public Order Act
1986 are designed to prevent convicted persons from attending
matches in England and Wales that have been prescribed for the
purpose. Section 15 of the Football Spectators Act 1989
enables a court to make a restriction order under that Act the
effect of which is to prevent a person who has been convicted
of a relevant offence from going to football matches played in
a country outside England and Wales where the match is of a
description that has been designated for the purposes of Part
II of that Act. The relevant offences are those listed in


                                                            16
Schedule 1 to that Act (see section 14(5)). The Bill should
amend that Schedule to add the offences proposed in this Part
of these Instructions. However, it should not add the offence
proposed in Part II of these Instructions.


     PART IV:   Amendments to Football Spectators Act 1989

4.1 It is proposed to use the opportunity provided by the
Bill to make a technical amendment correcting an error in the
Football Spectators Act 1989.


4 . ^ ^ The intended effect of a restriction order made under
section 15 of that Act has been described in paragraph 3.33
above. Once a restriction order has been made under that
section, a person subject to such an order (and who is not
prevented from so doing by a sentence of imprisonment) is
required by section 16(2)(b) of that Act to report to any
police station in England or Wales on the occasion of a
football match outside England and Wales that has been
designated under section 14(2) of that Act at the time or
between the times specified in a notice given to the person by
the enforcing authority under section 19 of that Act.

4.3 It had been intended that there should be two types of
designated football match. In the first type reporting would
be obligatory for all persons subject to restriction orders;
in the second type reporting would be obligatory only for such
persons as are required to report under section 19(3)(b) of
the Football Spectators Act 1989. Section 19(3)(a) makes
provision for the notices to be issued by the enforcing
authority in respect of the first type of designated football
match.


4.4 By virtue of an oversight the duty to report which is
imposed by section 16(2)(b) operates only in respect of
matches for which a notice has been given under section
19(3)(b) (discretionary reporting).   Accordingly, it does not


                                                             17
impose a duty to report in respect of designated football
matches where reporting is obligatory and which are covered by
notices under section 19(1)(a). The Bill should amend section
16(2)(b) so that it applies to any notice given under section
19(3) .




H o Â® Office
               1991
