From:      F J Smith                         cc     Ms   Snow
           F8 Division                              Ms   Rex
           Ext 2952                                 Mr   Boys Smith
           2 October 1989                           Mr   Mower
                                                    Mr   Goddard
                                                    Mr   Mould
                                                    Mr   Lee, DoE
                                                    Mr   Lidington



Mr Storr


FOOTBALL HOOLIGANISM: BLACKPOOL V BIRMINGHAM CITY

The Home Secretary may wish to be aware of the disorder
associated with the Blackpool v Birmingham City game on Saturday
30 September. I understand that Mr Johnson, the Chief Constable
of the Lancashire Constabulary, will be meeting the Home
Secretary later today on other matters but will be bringing to
that meeting a full report of the incident.


2.   Many of the visiting Birmingham City supporters arrived in
Blackpool on the previous evening and sporadic outbreaks of minor
disorder occurred that evening and the following morning. This
came to a head at 13.00 on Saturday when a group of some 500
Birmingham followers congregated in a seafront public house.
Fighting broke out and police officers attempting to control the
situation were met by a barrage of bottles. The fans then
rampaged through the streets en route to the ground frightening
local shoppers and holidaymakers.


3.   Further problems arose on arrival at the ground. As a result
of previous incidents of hooliganism involving Birmingham City
supporters, not least the pitch invasion at Crystal Palace's
ground on 13 May, the Football League has decreed that all their
away matches should be all-ticket. Some 300 of the troublesome
fans did not hold tickets and, in hostile mood, attempted to
force their way into the ground. Mindful of the issue of public %
safety, a heavy contingent of police officers was deployed to
prevent their entry. Their task was made all the more difficult
by fans inside the ground abetting those outside by forcing open
the gates from within. Officers inside the ground who were
attempting to return these fans to the terraces were met by a
hail of coins and other objects and were forced to don riot gear
for their own protection in order to deal with the situation. â€™


4.   The situation was quickly diffused but left one police
inspector and two spectators- slightly injured. Over 200 officers
had been deployed to police the match, far more than generally
required to police a football crowd of some 6,000. Over the
course of the weekend over 100 arrests were made and, as a result
of incidents at the match, 34 fans from the West Midlands area
are appearing in court today charged with public order offences.




                                        F J SMITH
