               From: Sir Richard Barratt, CBE, QPM.




                                               14th February 1990.




                THE HTT.T.SBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER

     Thank you for your letter of 6th February outlining the
Association's views on some aspects of the Hillsborough Final
Report.

     I fully understand and share the concern expressed that
lessons from past disasters and recommendations following them
have not always been pursued with sufficient vigour. However, as
you are aware the Home Secretary has already expressed the view
that those who have so far shrugged off their responsibilities
would now have to face up to them.    I am therefore hopeful that
the Government's declared intention to require full compliance
with the report's recommendations in relation to safety, ground
improvements and crowd control, will ensure that effective action
is taken on this occasion.

     I note your Association's support for the proposals
contained in Recommendations 70 and 71 and in particular the need
for legislation to deal with ticket touts and the use of the word
'pitch' in Recommendations 71(iii). I have brought these matters
to the attention of the Head of F8 Division.     You will already
know that the Home Secretary has indicated that there will be
urgent consideration of the case for new offences, and new powers
to deal with those excluded from grounds by courts.




Chief Superintendent T G Hewitt,
Police Superintendents' Association.
