                                                          16 AUG 1989 I c t f !â– +
E.R.
       FEP/89 35/48/98

                                                    cc:    Mr Osborne (LAB)
                                                           Mr Mould

       Mr Bolton
       G2 Division


       FOOTBALL SPECTATORS BILL:   CONSULTATION AND APPEAT.S


            This is in response to your note of 14 August to me.

            2.   I am in broad agreement with the doubts you express
       about the effect of clause 13 of the Football Spectators Bill on
       sections 3(3), 4(8) and 5 of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act
       1975. Since we are responsible for the working of the 1975 Act I
       think we have a right to insist on the doubts being put to
       Counsel. If we are not satisfied with the way that DoE deal with
       this, I think we would be entitled to pursue the doubts with
       Counsel direct. At the very least we ought to have something in
       writing from Counsel explaining their reasons for what they are
       alleged to believe. Indeed I think there is a strong case for
       our instructing Counsel on these changes since they concern the
       1975 Act, if DoE agree. The lines of communication would be more
       direct.

            3.   As respects section 3(3), that provision clearly
       operates to require a copy of an application for a safety
       certificate to be sent to the persons there specified and for
       those persons to be consulted about the provisions of the safety
       certificate except possibly those which the FLA require to be
       included. The consultation process must accordingly be complied
       with before the certificate can be issued and the Bill's
       provisions will not cast doubt on that.

            4.    The problem is more acute in relation to section 4(8).
       Whilst it might be absurd for a local authority to consult about
       provisions they are required to include in the certificate, it is
       not obvious beyond doubt that that absurdity deprives a statutory
       provision of its effect. Incidentally, if as a result of looking
       at the certificate again following the notice from the FLA the
       local authority decide that other amendments ought to be made to
       the certificate, section 4(8) would apply as respects those
       amendments.

            5.    Since it is conceded that the Bill is to be amended to
       impose a duty on the FLA to consult various bodies (paragraph 2
       of your note), I think we should ask for the provision to also
       disapply the obligation to consult under sections 3(3) and 4(8)
       as respects those conditions which the FLA, following that
       consultation, require to be included. This would put the matter
       beyond doubt and I cannot see that it would do any harm.
     6.        I am quite unable to understand why clause 13 has the
effect of preventing the persons mentioned in paragraphs (b) to
(d) of section 5(5) from appealing against conditions which the
FLA requires to be included in a safety certificate, whilst not
depriving the holder of a certificate (paragraph (a) of that
provision) of his right of appeal. If indeed this is Counsel's
view (and I doubt that it is) , I should be grateful for a
detailed explanation of the reasons for it.


     7.   For what it is worth, I agree with your view that all
of the persons mentioned in section 5(5) should have the right of
appeal as respects conditions included in a certificate by virtue
of a requirement from the FLA. However, I suggest it would also
be sensible to amend section 5 so that the FLA can be treated as
a party to the appeal proceedings. I rather doubt whether the
application of the Magistrates' Courts Act 1980, as respects
England and Wales, would allow them to be treated as a party (see
section 5(3A) of the 1975 Act, as inserted by section 22(3) of
the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987). I also
suggest that the FLA should be added to the persons who can
appeal (to the Crown Court in England and Wales) under section
5(3C) and (3D) (as inserted) against the order made on the
initial appeal. If you adopt these suggestions, the FLA would
have the opportunity of arguing its case before the courts even
though the local authority and other interested parties disagree
with it. These suggestions might also be of use in persuading
DoE to drop their opposition to interested parties having rights
of appeal in respect of conditions which the FLA require to be
inserted into safety certificates. The right of appeal to the
Crown Court might also be seen as a way of avoiding the
possibility that local sympathies might unduly influence the
decision of a magistrates' court.

     8.   In paragraph 5 of your note, you invite me to consider
the principles behind the appeal provisions. The relevant
principle is that the function of the courts is to resolve
disputes between persons who disagree and it follows from this
that the determination of the courts is final. I cannot imagine
that the FLA would be so irresponsible as to issue a fresh notice
requiring the inclusion of a particular condition immediately on
losing an appeal in the Crown Court in respect of the same
condition (which is what paragraph 5 to some extent envisages).
In theory at least a local authority could continue to try to
amend a certificate under the 1975 Act (as currently enacted)
notwithstanding that they had lost an appeal in respect of the
condition they wish to insert? in practice, I am not aware that
the problem has arisen and, quite apart from being penalised in
costs, an injunction might be available from the High Court to
restrain such an abuse of the system.

     9.   However, this possibility need not arise in the form of
such a bleak confrontation. Ideas about what is required for
safety can change and must necessarily take account of events
(such as incidents at grounds or, for that matter, the Taylor
Reports). Furthermore, a condition which the FLA require to be
imposed will probably not be framed in precisely the same way as
an earlier requirement which has been imposed either by the local
authority or the FLA but has been rejected on appeal.
Accordingly, I hope that the concerns which paragraph 5 of your
note addressed will resolve themselves in practice.

     10.       I shall be on leave from 21 August to 8 September
(inclusive) but, if necessary, Clive Osborne will deal with these
matters in my absence.




                                                      R J CLAYTON
                                           Legal Adviser's Branch

16 August 1989
