hs.2.9/taylor7.peb


                                         cc    Miss Dent
                                               Miss Snow
                                               Mr Yates
                                               Mr Turney
                                               Mr Whalley
                                               Mr Mower
                                               Mr Godfrey

Mr Gilbert
Parliamentary Section



HANDLING OP THE TAYLOR REPORT

I have seen Mr Whalley's note to you of 5 February and know that
you have now written to Philip Mawer.

I imagine that this subject, insofar as it applies to the Taylor
report, is now closed. Nevertheless I feel that I should comment
on paragraph 4 of Mr Whalley1s note because X think it raises a
matter which is an important consideration when a report of this
kind is published.

The report was received in the Home Office on Friday 19 January
when the Home Secretary was on Merseyside and was subsequently
travelling direct to his constituency. There was a deliberate
decision by officials that because the report was obviously a
political "hot potato" it should not go out of the office before
the Home Secretary had seen it and that it should not be
circul&ted within the office other than those who would need to
read it over the weekend in order to be able to advise the Home
Secretary on Monday morning.   In the event the Home Secretary
decided himself that the report should be sent to the Secretary
of State for the Environment.

I do not think that in the circumstances it would have been
possible to have released the text to the printer earlier than
on Monday 22 January.

It seems to me that unless a deliberate decision is taken in
advance of receipt of a report that it is to be printed and
published as a matter of priority, then it would not be possible
on a future occasion to do other than was done on this occasion.
If such a decision is necessary then it seems to me sensible that
Parliamentary Section should take the initiative in seeing that
it is taken.




                                         P E BOLTON

9 February 1990
