                                              Mr Walters
                                              Miss Snow
                                              Ms Spencer
                                              Mr Yates
                                              Mr Chilcot
                                              Mr Moriarty
                                              Mr Boys Smith
                                              Mr Bolton
                                              Mr Goddard
                                              Mr Mould
                                              Mr Smith ,^^3-
                                              Mr Mower
                                              Mr Godfrey


Mr Turney

HILLSBOROUGH REPORT - OPPOSITION DAY DEBATE

The Opposition have chosen, for a half-day debate in their own
time next week, the subject "Implications of the Taylor Report
on Safety at Football Grounds".   The debate will take place
next ghu-roday, 30 January, between 7.00pm and 10.00pm, on what
is expected to be an amendable Opposition motion.   The motion
is unlikely to be available until after the Home Secretary's
Statement on Monday and hence it will be necessary for a draft
Government amendment to be prepared without the benefit of the
text (I should be grateful if Mr Godfrey could note this
point).

Mr Hattersley will open for the Opposition, followed by the
Home Secretary.   Mr Howell, for the Opposition, and
Mr Moynihan will wind up the debate.

I should be grateful if you could co-ordinate the preparation
of a speech for the Home Secretary of about 20 minutes' length
which, with background material should reach Mr Walters by
5.00pm tomorrow, Friday 26 January (and be copied to me
p lease). I should also be grateful if you could liaise with
Department of Environment officials as appropriate both to
supplement the Home Secretary's speech with Department of
Environment material and to provide Home Office speaking notes
for Mr Moynihan.

Finally, it Would be helpful if you could let Miss Brathwaite
(ext 3526) know which officials will attend the debate.




                                                      I N Jones
                                     Deputy Parliamentary Clerk


Private Office
25 January 1990
