                                           QUEEN ANâ€™NE S GATE LONDON SW1H 9AT




                                    fn ~      rts
                                    <vr
                                    for -hu/n /ft'
        Following my statement to the House on 17 April about the
Hillsborough tragedy, you asked about compensation for those affected.      I
undertook to look at the matter further.    I have since received your letter
of 19 April suggesting that we might discuss the matter.

        I share your desire to ensure that the victims and relatives of the
tragedy at Hillsborough receive compensation as quickly as possible. As you
know, the Government has already announced a contribution of half a million
pounds to the disaster fund which has been established.     I expect that a
sizeable fund will be likely to emerge through the generosity of members of
the public.   I have no doubt that those responsible for administering the
fund will ensure that payments are made in cases of hardship as quickly as
possible.

        One possible avenue for compensation, which may be open to the
victims and their dependents, is for them to bring civil claims.        I can
understand the difficulties this could entail for them, first because of the
time involved and second because of the need under the present system to
prove fault on the part of another. The Lord Chancellor recently announced
that the Government had accepted the principal recommendations of the Civil
Justice Review Body, which reported in June 1988.       The report contained
recommendations on the reform of civil litigation in general as well as some
recommendations specifically directed at the particular area of personal
injury litigation. The recommendations which have been accepted are directed
to the simplification of court procedures, with the hope of significant
advances in the speed and accessibility of justice in the near future.     As
the Lord Chancellor made clear in his announcement, this is an area of major
concern to which the Government is giving a high priority.     The Government
has, however, no plans to introduce a system of no fault compensation which
would cover every kind of injury (but, although not related to this case, the
Lord Chancellor is considering the recommendation of the Civil Justice
Review Body that possible schemes for no fault compensation for minor road
accident injuries should be examined).

        Robin Ferrers, the Minister of State at the Home Office responsible
for dealing with emergencies, would be willing to discuss the position
regarding compensation for those affected by the Hillsborough tragedy with
you if you so wish.    But, as you will understand, questions about civil
remedies are mainly for the Lord Chancellor, to whom I am sending a copy of
this letter.


                                             S^CSu-




Frank F i e l d ,   E s q . , MP.
