PS/Mr Nicholls                             cc PS/Secretary of State
                                              PS/Minister of State
                                              PS/Secretary




        PUBLICATION OF THE HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY INTERIM REPORT
                         NOTE FOR INFORMATION

1.   Ministers have  received a copy of Douglas Hurd's letter of
2nd August to the Prime Minister with a draft of the statement
released by the Home Secretary at 11am today.   Also the draft of
the circular being sent to local authorities etc.

2.   This submission   is to clarify       the   Health   and    Safety
Executive's (HSE) role in the matter.

3.   The most specific    legislation, setting detailed standards
for safety of spectators at football    stadia, is the Safety of
Sports Grounds Act 1975.    This is enforced by local authorities
with Home Office taking the policy lead.     HSE has a secondary
role as the enforcing authority for the HSW Act but in accordance
with the usual    administrative   arrangements  for overlapping
legislation has not sought to enforce the general requirements of
the HSW Act for the purposes of public safety.

4.   However HSE have provided considerable technical assistance
to the    inquiry eg.   reports on an examination of the crowd
barriers, their tensile strength and calculations of the forces
involved.    They have also carried out surveys of the pens in the
terraces including estimates of capacities and packing density.
Computer models were used to provide analysis of admissions and
crowds outside from video   recordings.   Investigations were also
made on the accuracy of turnstile counting and recording.

5.    The inquiry has    identified no shortcomings in the law
covering safety in sportsgrounds which indicates that current
policy on boundaries between Acts is correct.




HS1
X5246                                4 August 1989
