                                                           Incident Report

                      HEALTH AND SAFETY EXECUTIVE

               RESEARCH AND LABORATORY SERVICES DIVISION

                      Broad Lane, Sheffield S3 7HQ




                An investigation into the number of
                people entering the stadium through
                Turnstiles A to G and through Gate C


                                   by

                              G A C Games BA

                                                IR/L/ME/89/34




                                               Issue authorised by: Dr A Jones

                                               Date: 1 February 1990

Distribution

The Court of Inquiry (5 copies)
ACC J Mervyn Jones West Midlands Police
Mr D C T Eves
Mr A Barrell TD
Mr P G Jones TD
Mr M S Nattrass FAID Area 14
Mr J P Giltrow HFS (N)
Mr M R Stephenson NE FCG
Mr M Fountain TD3
Mr M James TD3
Mr C J Pertee NE FCG
Mr J B Hibbs NE FCG
Dr J McQuaid
Dr A Jones
Dr J H Foley
Dr C E Nicholson                        TO RLSD/DIAS STAFF ONLY
Mr P F Heyes                            NOT TO BE COMMUNICATED OUTSIDE
Mr I R Price                            RLSD WITHOUT THE APPROVAL OF
Mr G Norton                             THE AUTHORISING OFFICER
Authors
RPS                                                        SMR/343/235/01
Library (2)
Registry File                                              S8 0.02.O T H .814
CONTENTS

1     INTRODUCTION

2     VIDEO TAPE RECORDINGS USED FOR ANALYSIS

3     LOCATION AND DESCRIPTION OF TURNSTILE BOOTHS A-G AND GATE C

4     THE COUNTING METHOD
      4.1 Turnstiles
      4.2 Gate C

5     DATA PROCESSING AND RESULTS
      5.1 Turnstiles
           5.1.1 Turnstile total counts
           5.1.2 Turnstile rate counts
           5.1.3  Comparison between RLSD counts and SWFC computer record
           5.1.4  Count for turnstiles F+G and error in SWFC count for turnstile G
           5.1.5  Estimate of total number of people through turnstiles A  to G
           5.1.6 Estimate of time at which 10100 people would have entered
                  through turnstiles A to G
           5.1.7 Turnstile C - Intervals between successive entrants
      5.2 Gate C
           5.2.1  First opening
           5.2.2  Second opening
           5.2.3  Third opening

6     SUMMARY OF RESULTS
      6.1 Turnstile counts, estimates, totals and rate of admission
      6.2 Counts and estimates for the three openings of gate C and final totals
      6.3 SWFC Computer counts for turnstiles A to G
           6.3.1 Turnstiles A to E
           6.3.2   Turnstile G

7     DISCUSSION
      7.1 Rate of admission through turnstiles A to G
      7.2 Gate C openings
      7.3 Times taken to pass through turnstile C

8     CONCLUSIONS


Table 1 Total number of people counted through turnstiles A to G at different
        times
Table 2 Number of people counted through turnstiles in each 5 minute interval
Table 3 Summary Table
Table 4 Number of people having the same interval of passage through turnstile C

Fig   1   Schematic plan showing turnstiles A to G and gate C
Fig   2   Total number of people counted by RLSD for turnstiles A to G
Fig   3   Number of people counted through turnstiles in each 5 minute interval
Fig   4   Rate of admission for turnstiles A to G
Fig   5   Turnstile C - Number of people having the same interval of passage
Fig   6   Number of people emerging from gate C at the 'Second Opening'
1     INTRODUCTION

I was told by Dr C E Nicholson, a Deputy Director of the Safety Engineering
Laboratory (SEL) of the Research and Laboratory Services Division (RLSD) of
the Health and Safety Executive (HSE), that on the 15th of April a video
recording had been made which showed people entering the Sheffield Wednesday
Football Club's (SWFC) stadium through the Leppings Lane turnstiles A, B, C,
D, E, F and G and through gate C; the turnstiles served the West Terrace and
North-West Terrace and in this report these terraces are called the 'West
terraces'. It is my understanding that the video camera had been in a fixed
position and had been recording from before 1:00 pm until after 3:00 pm. As
part of the HSE investigation of the incident Dr Nicholson asked me to analyse
a copy of the recording to:

i)     count the total number of people who had entered through these
       turnstiles and compare these counts with the counts registered by the
       Sheffield Wednesday's computerised system for recording admissions.

ii)    measure the rate at which people had entered the stadium through
       turnstiles A to G throughout the period of the video recording.

iii) estimate the number of people who had entered the stadium through gate C.

I was assisted by other staff of RLSD working under my supervision and to my
instructions. Police Constable (PC) R Watson of the West Midlands Police
liaised with me and he provided the copies of the video recordings. He gave me
a copy of a statement by Peter John Wilkinson of West Mercia Police TV Unit
which gave details of the copy and edit procedure that had been undertaken
from the original video tape.


2 VIDEO TAPE RECORDINGS USED FOR ANALYSIS

Dr Nicholson gave me copies of drawings which had been produced by Ralph Brade
and Associates. Drawing No 1340/05 titled 'Close Circuit Television Cameras
Location Plan' shows 'S.W.F.C. CAMERA 2 GATES A-G' and it is my understanding
that the original VHS video tape identified as 'RJH2' was produced from
signals sent by a camera at this location and that all the video recordings
used by RLSD for analysis were copied from this original tape.

The U-matic video tape recordings used for 'turnstile' admission analysis were
delivered by PC R Watson on 15 May 89; the individual tapes were labelled
RJH2/E/Part 1 Copy A, RJH2/E/Part 2 Copy A, RJH2/E/Part 3 Copy A, RJH2/F/Part
1 Copy A, RJH2/F/Part 2 Copy A, RJH2/F/Part 3 Copy A. The tapes showed the
exits of turnstile booths A to G from approximately 12:55 pm until 3:10 pm on
15 April 1989. The '/E/' Tapes showed the exits of turnstiles A, B and C and
the '/?/' Tapes showed the exits of turnstiles D, E, F and G. The two Part l's
covered the first hour, the two Part 2's the second hour and the two Part 3's
the remaining time. The continuous reference timings on the video tapes were
with respect to the start of each tape and not to British Summer Time (BST)
but I determined the relationship between these times and BST using specific
events in conjunction with West Midlands Police.

The VHS video recording used for 'gate C analysis' was a copy identified as
DFl/B and had been produced by Mr D Francis, an RLSD photographer, from a
video recording labelled RJH2, loaned to us by PC R Watson. The copy had
continuous reference timings which related to the start of the tape and not to
BST. The recording showed the exits of turnstile booths A to G, gate C and the
general area on the West Stand side of these turnstiles.


3     LOCATION AND DESCRIPTION OF TURNSTILE BOOTHS A-G AND GATE C

Fig 1 is a schematic plan showing the seven turnstiles A to G and gate C. The
location of the turnstile booths and of gate C is shown on the Ralph Brade and
Associates drawing No 1340/04A and the aperture of gate C when open is shown
as 4115 ram. Gate C, when closed, formed part of the perimeter boundary and was
adjacent to turnstile booth G and approximately perpendicular to the row of
turnstile booths. Normally gate C was closed and it is my understanding that
the main function of gate C was to let people out of the stadium after a
match.

The turnstile booth exits consisted of seven doors, designated in alphabetical
order from A to G. When viewed from the video camera location door A was on
the right and furthest away from the video camera. Doors A and B, D and E, F
and G were in pairs and Door C was on its own. Within the booths the exit
doors aligned directly with the appropriate turnstile passage, but the
internal layout of the turnstile booths did not prevent a person passing
through the 'gate' of turnstile A and then emerging from the door of the booth
marked B (and vice versa); similarly for the other paired turnstiles. In my
opinion, this indirect route may have been used on a few occasions, for
example if there was someone standing in the way at the normal 'direct' exit
door. Thus the individual counts for the 'paired' turnstiles may be less
accurate than the sum of the two counts from the two doors of a p ai r.

The turnstile mechanisms were not identical in design nor in ease of operation
and details are reported by Games and Waterhouse (RLSD report IR/L/ME/89/33).

It is my understanding that on the 15th April these 7 turnstiles served the
West terraces which had a designated capacity of 10,100 persons.


4     THE COUNTING METHOD

4.1     TURNSTILES

The counting method used a specially developed computer program and
micro-computer. The video recording was played at normal speed and the
computer's clock was synchronised with a reference time on the video image.
Whenever a person was seen to emerge from a specific turnstile booth an RLSD
observer depressed a push button, closing an electrical circuit and sending an
electrical pulse signal to the computer. The computer recorded each signal
pulse and the elapsed times from the start of playback. People emerging from
turnstiles A and B were registered together because the shadows on the video
recording image sometimes made it impossible to differentiate between people
emerging from the exit door of turnstile A and those from the exit door of
turnstile B. People emerging from all other turnstiles were registered
separately.

4.2 GATE C

Dr Nicholson v/as informed by Inspector M Layton of West Midlands Police that
gate C had been opened three times and that the 'First Opening' had occurred
at approximately 2;48 pm for a duration of about 30 seconds and that the
'Second Opening' had occurred at approximately 2:52 pm for a duration of about
5 minutes 30 seconds. A 'Third Opening' had occurred approximately one minute
later when the gate was opened sufficiently to allow the entry of people in
single file for approximately 8 minutes.

The position of gate C on the video image and the small distance between
adjacent people as they passed through gate C made it impracticable to discern
each person as they passed through the open gate. Therefore the method of
assessment for the first two openings was to count the number of people
passing a reference line drawn on the video display monitor for a recording
period of 3 seconds, and then to repeat this process at intervals throughout
the period of opening. The reference line was drawn so that any person who had
entered through gate C would cross the line, whilst generally being separated
from other people by a greater distance than when passing through the open
gate, thus making each person more discernable. The path of each person was
viewed to ensure that people emerging from turnstiles were not counted. The
counting process was repeated several times, by rewinding and replaying the
video tape, for each sample, to ensure that the chance of not counting a
particular person was reduced to a minimum. The playback speed on the video
recorder was adjusted to play the recording slowly enough to optimize the
counting.

Four samples were taken during the First Opening and 27 samples were taken
during the Second Opening; the longest interval between samples being 15
seconds. The whole of the Third Opening was analysed in one continuous sample.


5 DATA PROCESSING AND RESULTS

5.1     TURNSTILES

5.1.1     Turnstile Total Counts

Table 1 shows how many people had been counted through the turnstiles at
intervals of 5 minutes, the bottom row of the table being the final count just
before the turnstiles were closed. Each row of the table gives the individual
total count for turnstiles C to G, the totals for the three pairs A+B, D+E,
F+G and the total for all seven turnstiles.

Fig 2 shows the total number of people who had been counted through all seven
turnstiles at any particular time and is a graphical representation of the
same data as the final column in Table 1 but every data point has been
presented, rather than just the totals at intervals of 5 minutes.

5.1.2    Turnstile Rate Counts

Table 2 shows the number of people counted through the turnstiles in each 5
minute interval. Each row of the table shows the individual 5 minute counts
for turnstiles C to G, the 5 minute count for the pairs A+B, D+E, F+G and the
5 minute count for the sum of all seven turnstiles. These counts can be
converted to rates of admission, measured as 'people per turnstile per hour',
by multiplying by 12 and dividing by the number of turnstiles under
consideration.

The last column of Table 3 shows the overall rates of admission for all seven
turnstiles for each 5 min period after 2:00 pm and the average (mean) rate of
admission measured over the 45 min period from 2:05 pm to 2:50 pm was
approximately 660 people/turnstile/hour.
For the period between 2:25 pm and 2:50 pm turnstile C, a single turnstile,
achieved a mean rate of admission of 830 people/turnstile/hour whereas the six
other 'paired' turnstiles achieved a significantly lower rate of 630
people/turnstile/hour.

A visual representation of the data for turnstiles A+B, C, D, E, F and G is
shown in the bar chart in Fig 3.

I analysed the data obtained from the counts from turnstiles A to G in greater
detail to give a more continuous measure of the rate at which people were
entering the stadium through these turnstiles. The method of analysis used a
period of time ('window') of three minutes and calculated the rate of
admission for the 'window' from the number of admissions made during its 3
minute duration. The 'window' was then moved forward by an increment of 0.5
minutes and a new rate of admission calculated. This process was repeated
until the end of the data was reached and the resulting graph of rate of
admission against time is shown in Fig 4. I made analyses using other
durations of the 'window'; a longer 'window' gave a smoother curve with some
loss of information and a shorter one gave rapid fluctuations which tended to
mask more general trends of change in rate of admission. It is my opinion that
a 'window' of 3 minutes gave the most representative rates of admission.

5.1.3    Comparison between RLSD counts and Sheffield Wednesday Football
         Club1s computer record

The RLSD final count totals are summarised in the following table and compared
with the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club's (SWFC) computer print-out, taken
on 15 April 1989 by Mr R J Houldsworth (RLSD report IR/L/ME/89/33).


Turnstiles                RLSD    SWFC            Differ
                          Count   Computer

A+B                       1930    2004            -3.7%

C                         1168    1206            -3.3%

D+E                       2130    2196            -3.0%

A to E                    5228    5406            -3.3%

F+G                       2019    1632            +23.7%

Total                     7247    7038


Dr Nicholson informed me that the turnstiles   were open for a period before the
start of the video recordings. In my opinion   this accounts for RLSD's count of
the admissions through turnstiles A to E being approximately 3.3% less than
the admissions shown on the print-out taken from the SWFC's computerised
system on 15 April. I have therefore concluded that SWFC's count for the total
number of admissions through turnstiles A to   E is likely to be correct.

5.1.4    Count for turnstiles F+G and error in   SWFC count for turnstile G

The SWFC count for turnstile F was 1049, 2% less than the RLSD count of
1071 (Table 1) but this may be attributable to some people passing through
turnstile G but emerging from Exit Door F; in my opinion the SWFC count is
probably accurate for this turnstile.

RLSD's count for turnstiles F+G was 23.7% higher than that obtained from
SWFC's computerised recording system. RLSD report IR/L/ME/89/33 concluded that
there was likely to be persistent under-recording from turnstile G and it is
my opinion that under-recording on turnstile G is probably the sole cause of
the discrepancy. I have assumed that the RLSD count of 2,019 is less than the
true count by the same percentage (3.3%) for turnstiles F+G as for turnstiles
A to E, and have estimated that 2,088 is the true total for turnstiles F+G.

My estimate of 2,088 for turnstiles F+G can therefore be divided into a count
of 1,049 for turnstile F (the SWFC count) and the remainder of 1,039 for
turnstile G. The SWFC count of 583 from turnstile G is therefore 56% of my
estimated correct number of admissions through this turnstile.

5.1.5   Estimate of total number of people through turnstiles A to G

It is my opinion that the best estimate for the final total of people admitted
through all seven turnstiles is given by adding the SWFC total for turnstiles
A to E of 5,406 to my estimate of 2,088 for turnstiles F+G, giving an overall
total of 7,494 admissions for turnstiles A to G. In my opinion, based on the
tests reported by Games and Waterhouse (RLSD report IR/L/ME/89/33), it is most
unlikely that the true total exceeded this value by more than 2% ie a maximum
of 7,644 for the number of people who passed through the seven turnstiles.

My estimated total of 7,494 admissions through turnstiles A to G from the time
that they were opened is 247 greater than the RLSD count. It is my opinion
that this is attributable to people entering the stadium before the start of
the video recording.

5.1.6   Estimate of time at which 10.100 people would have entered
        through turnstiles A to G

RLSD's count at 2:50 pm was 5,868 but an estimated 247 people had entered the
stadium before the start of the video recording. Therefore at 2:50 pm the
estimated number of people who had entered through turnstiles A to G was
6,115. Based on a capacity of 10,100 for the West terraces there were still
3,985 people yet to enter the stadium for these terraces. The average (mean)
rate of admission, measured over a 45 min period, was 660 people/turnstile/
hour. If this rate had been maintained I have estimated that it would have
taken until approximately 3:40 pm to admit the remaining 3,985 people.

Prior to the 'Second Opening' of gate C at approximately 2:52 pm the highest
rate of admission, measured over a period of 5 minutes, for the seven
turnstiles was 702 people/turnstile/hour (Table 3 Col 5). If this rate had
been constantly maintained it would have taken about 123 minutes to admit
10,100 people. For all these people to have entered the stadium before 3:00 pm
the first entrants would have needed to enter before 1:00 pm and continued to
enter at this maximum rate.

Prior to the 'Second Opening' of gate C the greatest number of admissions
during a period of 5 minutes through turnstile C, a single turnstile, was 76
people, and for any pair of turnstiles it was 141 people (Table 2). On the
basis of these values I have calculated a theoretical maximum composite
admission for all seven turnstiles (single C and pairs A+B, D+E, F+G) for a 5
min period:
i.e. 76 + (3 x 141) = 499 people through 7 turnstiles in 5 minutes, which
represents 855 people/turnstile/hour. If this rate had been constantly
maintained it would have taken about 101 minutes to admit 10,100 people. For
all these people to have entered the stadium before 3:00 pm the first entrants
would have needed to enter before 1:20 pm and have continued to enter at this
theoretical maximum composite rate of admission.

5.1.7     Turnstile C - Intervals Between Successive Entrants

Turnstile C was the only turnstile where the people necessarily emerged from
one door. Therefore the data from this turnstile was further analysed to give
the time intervals between the emergence of successive people. The data which
was analysed consisted of the times of emergence, rounded to the nearest whole
number of seconds, for each person.

The admissions after 2:00 pm were divided into successive groups of 10 minutes
duration and the data in each group analysed to give the number of people that
had emergence times of 0 second, 1 second, 2 seconds, 3 seconds, etc after the
previous person.

There is an anomoly which gives a small number of times for a 0 second
interval. The reason for this anomoly is because of the procedure which
rounded the actual times to the nearest integer times; for example if a person
emerged with an actual time of 97.51 seconds and the next person 0.98 seconds
later with an actual time of 98.49 seconds, both of these people would
register as 98 seconds and the interval would be calculated as 0 second. A '0
second' interval is therefore occasionally, but not necessarily, recorded for
a person who emerged from the door within 1 second of the previous person.
These rounding errors were not cumulative and do not affect the average (mean)
time of passage.

Table 4 shows the number of people having the same time interval of passage
through turnstile C and its contents are presented as the bar charts of Fig 5
which show the frequency distribution of the various times; times exceeding 10
seconds are not shown. Both Table 4 and Fig 5 show that the average (mean)
time taken to pass through turnstile C was always greater than the most
frequently occurring time of passage.

5.2     GATE C

5.2.1     First Opening

I assumed that the rate at which people entered through gate C changed
linearly between successive sampling periods. The counts made during each of
the 3 second sample periods were therefore used to calculate an estimated
number of entries between each sample period. The total number of entries
through gate C was obtained from the sum of these estimates, added to the
counts made during the sampling periods. The total number estimate was 130 but
in my opinion this estimate should be regarded as a minimum because of the
likelihood that some people were obscured by others. My best estimate would
be that about 150 people entered during the 'First Opening' of gate C and in
my opinion the actual number was unlikely to have been greater than 180.

5.2.2     Second Opening

There was an initial surge of people during which a sample was taken and the
measured rate for this sample was 10 people/second; the flow soon became
relatively steady and the rates of admission for many of the samples during the
remainder of the period were about 6 people/second. Drawing No 1340/04A showed
Gate C to be 4115 mm wide and by assuming a shoulder width of 550 mm I
calculated that it would allow 7 people to pass abreast when it was fully
opened. The measured rate of 6 people/second therefore corresponds
approximately to a rate of 1 person per shoulder width per second.

A similar method of analysis was used to that for the 'First Opening' and Fig
6 shows a graph of the number of people who entered through gate C during the
'Second Opening'; the asterisks on the graph denote the individual sample
points. The total number estimate was 1800 but in my opinion this estimate
should be regarded as a minimum because of the likelihood that some people
were obscured by others. My best estimate, based on the assumption that 1
person in 10 may not have been counted, would be about 2000 and in my opinion
the actual number was unlikely to have been greater than 2200.

5.2.3     Third Opening

Entries during the 'Third Opening' were at a much lower rate than in the other
two openings and a continuous count was made over a period of about 8 minutes.
A total of 90 people were counted and in my opinion the actual number is
unlikely to have been greater than 100.


6   SUMMARY OF RESULTS

6.1     TURNSTILE COUNTS, ESTIMATES, TOTALS AND RATE OF ADMISSION

The '5 minute totals' and rates for turnstiles A to G are summarised in Table
3.

The third column in Table 3 was obtained from my assumption that the
discrepancy of 247 between the RLSD total and final estimated total was due to
people entering the stadium before the start of the video recording. This
number has therefore been added to all the intermediate RLSD counts to give an
estimated count for the intermediate times.

The total entries shown in the fourth column were obtained by adding, at
appropriate times, admissions through turnstiles A to G from the third column
to my best estimates of the number of entries made through gate C.
6.2    COUNTS AND ESTIMATES FOR THE THREE OPENINGS OF GATE C AND THE FINAL TOTALS

The estimates for gate C and estimated totals for the turnstiles are
summarised below:

                   RLSD Count     'Best' Estimate      Maximum !

First Opening       130                    150              180

Second Opening     1800                   2000             2200

Third Opening           90                  90              100

Total gate C       2020                   2240             2480


Turnstiles         7247                   7494             7644

Total              9267                   9734            10124


6.3    SWFC COMPUTER COUNTS FOR TURNSTILE A TO G

6.3.1     Turnstiles A to E

The RLSD counts for these turnstiles would indicate that the SWFC counts for
turnstiles A to E were accurate and in my opinion SWFC's record of the
admissions through these turnstiles would not be in error by more than 2%.

6.3.2     Turnstile G

The SWFC count for turnstile G was low and estimates in this report indicate
that the SWFC computer only registered about 56% of the correct number of
admissions through this turnstile. Evidence of the turnstile switch
malfunctioning is reported by Games and Waterhouse (RLSD report IR/L/ME/89/33)
and this would account for errors in the total registered by the SWFC
computer.


7     DISCUSSION

7.1    RATE OF ADMISSION THROUGH TURNSTILES A TO G

I consider it reasonable to suppose that, in the absence of crowd forces, the
rate at which people entered the stadium would rise until there were queues at
all the turnstiles. I would then have expected the rate of admission to remain
fairly constant, possibly rising slightly as the match start time approached.

Fig 4 shows that from about 2:05 pm the rate was fairly constant until
2:25 pm, which in my opinion suggests that all turnstiles had queues and
people were not having undue difficulty in entering the turnstiles.

After about 2:25 pm turnstile C generally has the highest rate of admission
and it is noticeable from Table 2 that the paired turnstiles were performing
less well. In particular turnstiles F+G recorded a count of only 86 between
2:45 pm and 2:50 pm and turnstiles D+E a count of 77 between 2:40 pm and
2:45 pm; equivalent to 516 and 462 people/turnstile/hour respectively. The
rate at which people were entering decreased at about 2:35 pm and in my
opinion a likely cause was crowd forces acting on the people entering the
turnstiles. Even so the lowest overall rate of admission for all seven
turnstiles for a 5 minute period of 610 people/turnstile/hour and the
corresponding highest overall rate of admission of 702 persons/turnstile/hour
were both within 8% of the average rate of 660 people/turnstile/hour that was
achieved for the period between 2:05 pm and 2:50 pm.

The theoretical maximum composite rate of admission was 855 people/turnstile/
hour and in my opinion this theoretical maximum may have been achievable for
these turnstiles operating under ideal conditions, for example with no crowd
pressure acting on people entering the turnstile booths and with each person
having their ticket ready. In my opinion the maximum measured rate of 702
people/turnstile/hour, achieved over a period of 5 minutes, would have been
maintained after 2:35 pm if there had been no crowd forces acting on people
entering the turnstiles.

7.2   GATE C OPENINGS

I calculated that an estimated 2000 people entered the stadium during the
'Second Opening', during which significant checking of tickets was not
apparent from the video recording. The rate of admission of the turnstiles
increased markedly at about the time of the 'Second Opening' of gate C. In
my opinion this increase may have been due to two possible causes:

a) the turnstile operators may not have been checking tickets to the same
extent as they were before the 'Second Opening'.

b) the 'Second Opening' resulted in decreased crowd forces thus allowing
people to enter the turnstiles more easily.

It is my opinion that the number of people who can pass through a given sized
opening in a given time will tend to be self-limiting. If a person moves more
quickly then more clearance between successive people will be required. If
people shuffle through almost touching each other their speed will be limited
because of lack of freedom of movement. For example if people walk at a speed
of 2 m/sec (4.5 mph) and a spacing of 1.5 m (5 ft) then 80 people per shoulder
width would pass a given point in 1 min; if the speed was 1 m/sec (2.2 mph)
and the spacing was 0.75 m (2.5 ft) the number of people passing the point in
1 min would be the same.

7.3 TIMES TAKEN TO PASS THROUGH TURNSTILE C

Fig 5 and Table 4 show that between 2:00 pm and 2:10 pm the most frequent time
of passage was 5 sec. The time then diminished to 3 sec for the
intervals of 2:30 pm to 2:40 pm and 2:40 pm to 2:50 pm, with an approximately
equal numbers of admissions taking 2 sec and 4 sec; however the mean times
for these intervals were 4.3 sec and 4.4 sec respectively, corresponding to
828 people/hour and 822 people/hour. This shows that the asymmetric
distribution of times, caused by a significant number of people taking longer
than 5 seconds, gives a mean time that is about 50% greater than the most
frequent time for this interval.

The relevance of the difference between the mean time and the most frequent
time is that the capacity of a turnstile cannot be calculated on the
assumption that each person will take the same time of passage.
8   CONCLUSIONS

8.1 My best estimate of the number of people admitted through turnstiles A to
G is 7,494 and through gate C is 2,240, i.e. a total of 9,734. It is my opinion
that the true total is most unlikely to have exceeded 10,124, i.e. the total
admissions were approximately equal to the designated capacity of 10,100
people for the West terraces.

8.2 RLSD measured the average (mean) rate of admission through turnstiles A to
G as 660 people/turnstile/hour for the 45 min period between 2:05 pm and
2:50 pm.

8.3 On the basis of RLSD's measured average rate of admission of 660
people/turnstile/hour through turnstiles A to G, and the number of people who
had already been admitted through these turnstiles at 2:50 pm, I have
estimated that if gate C had not been opened it would have taken until about
3:40 pm to admit a total of 10,100 people through these turnstiles.

8.4 Using RLSD's measured maximum rate of admission of 702
people/turnstile/hour through turnstiles A to G I calculated that people would
need to have been continuously entering through these turnstiles at this rate
before 1:00 pm to enable 10,100 people to enter the West terraces before
3:00 pm.

8.5 The rate of admission into the stadium increased markedly at about 1:45 pm
rising from about 300 to about 550 people/turnstile/hour. The 5 minute rate
for all seven turnstiles peaked at 702 people/turnstile/hour for the period
2:30 pm to 2:35 pm and remained within about 8% of the average (mean) rate of
660 people/turnstile/hour between 2:05 pm until 2:50 pm. There was a fall in
the rate at about 2:35 pm with no recovery until about the time of the 'Second
Opening' of gate C when the rate of admission increased markedly. At this
stage the turnstile operators may not have been checking tickets to the same
extent and crowd pressure outside the turnstiles may have decreased.

8.6 The distribution of the times of passage through turnstile C, a single
turnstile, was asymmetric and the mean time of passage was always significantly
greater than the most frequent time. Between 2:30 pm and 2:50 pm the most
frequently occurring time of passage was 3 sec but the mean time of passage
was 4.4 seconds.

8.7 Turnstile C, a single turnstile, achieved a significantly higher rate of
admission of 830 people/turnstile/hour during the period between 2:30 pm and
2:50 pm in comparison with 630 people/turnstile/hour for the other six
turnstiles which were in pairs.

8.8 Sheffield Wednesday Football Club's computerised system for recording
admissions to the stadium registered only approximately 56% of the people who
entered through turnstile G. There is no evidence from the RLSD counting that
any of the total counts from turnstiles A to F were registered incorrectly.
Table 1


TOTAL NUMBER OF PEOPLE COUNTED THROUGH TURNSTILES A to G AT DIFFERENT TIMES

                             TURNSTILE

   TIME    A+B      C        D      E      F     G     D+E    F+G   TOTAL
    pm

   1:00      3     10      5        7       9     8     12     17     42
   1:05     19     21     24       23      16    21     47     37    124
   1:10     40     41     39       43      28    40     82     68    231
   1:15     64     54     56       59      35    44    115     79    312
   1:20     84     74     76       80      47    53    156    100    414
   1:25    114     92     98       94      56    60    192    116    514
   1:30    146    114    131      111      74    85    242    159    661
   1:35    178    149    151      113      93   102    264    195    786
   1:40    216    176    185      131     125   124    316    249    957
   1:45    271    199    217      165     150   141    382    291   1143
   1:50    363    241    278      211     189   182    489    371   1464
   1:55    448    280    336      270     229   214    606    443   1777
   2:00    535    341    390      312     281   262    702    543   2121
   2:05    603    399    439      348     331   303    787    634   2423
   2:10    690    447    494      399     398   377    893    775   2805
   2:15    784    490    546      448     463   444    994    907   3175
   2:20    883    537    611      496     532   509   1107   1041   3568
   2:25    989    587    676      548     589   559   1224   1148   3948
   2:30   1097    658    736      603     634   618   1339   1252   4346
   2:35   1206    730    790      663     691   676   1453   1367   4756
   2:40   1309    796    847      709     758   720   1556   1478   5139
   2:45   1415    857    892      741     820   770   1633   1590   5495
   2:50   1522    933    946      791     873   803   1737   1676   5868
   2:55   1649   1000   1015      832     932   840   1847   1772   6268
   3:00   1790   1096   1098      902    1005   904   2000   1909   6795
   3:05   1911   1160   1163      951    1066   940   2114   2006   7191
   3:10   1930   1168   1170      960    1071   948   2130   2019   7247


Ref SEL1 [300,5]hdtabl.tab
Table 2

NUMBER OF PEOPLE COUNTED          TURNSTILES IN EACH 5 MINUTE INTERVAL

                                  TURNSTILE

     TIME            A+B     C    D       E      F     G     D+E    F+G    TOTAL
      pm

 12:55    -   1:00      3    10     5      7      9      8     12     17      42
  1:00    -   1:05     16    11    19     16      7     13     35     20      82
  1:05    -   1:10     21    20    15     20     12     19     35     31     107
  1:10    -   1:15     24    13    17     16      7      4     33     11      81
  1:15    -   1:20     20    20    20     21     12      9     41     21     102
  1:20    -   1:25     30    18    22     14      9      7     36     16     100
  1:25    -   1:30     32    22    33     17     18     25     50     43     147
  1:30    -   1:35     32    35    20      2     19     17     22     36     125
  1:35    -   1:40     38    27    34     18     32     22     52     54     171
  1:40    -   1:45     55    23    32     34     25     17     66     42     186
  1:45    -   1:50     92    42    61     46     39     41    107     80     321
  1:50    -   1:55     85    39    58     59     40     32    117     72     313
  1:55    -   2:00     87    61    54     42     52     48     96    100     344
  2:00    -   2:05     68    58    49     36     50     41     85     91     302
  2:05    -   2:10     87    48    55     51     67     74    106    141     382
  2:10    -   2:15     94    43    52     49     65     67    101    132     370
  2:15    -   2:20     99    47    65     48     69     65    113    134     393
  2:20    -   2:25    106    50    65     52     57     50    117    107     380
  2:25    -   2:30    108    71    60     55     45     59    115    104     398
  2:30    -   2:35    109    72    54     60     57     58    114    115     410
  2:35    -   2:40    103    66    57     46     67     44    103    111     383
  2:40    -   2:45    106    61    45     32     62     50     77    112     356
  2:45    -   2:50    107    76    54     50     53     33    104     86     373
  2:50    -   2:55    127    67    69     41     59     37    110     96     400
  2:55    -   3:00    141    96    83     70     73     64    153    137     527
  3:00    -   3:05    121    64    65     49     61     36    114     97     396
  3:05    -   3:10     19     8     7      9      5      8     16     13      56

Ref SELl [300,5]hdtab2.tab
Table 3

SUMMARY TABLE

Time            Total        Total       Total     Rate for 5 minutes
                Turnstile    Turnstile   Turnstile in people per
                Count        Estimate    + Gate C turnstile per hour
                                         Estimate

2.00 pm         2121         2368        2368
                                                         517
2.05            2423         2670        2670
                                                         654
2.10            2805         3052        3052
                                                         634
2.15            3175         3422        3422
                                                         673
2.20            3568         3815        3815
                                                         651
2.25            3948         3948        3948
                                                         682
2.30            4346         4593        4593
                                                         702
2.35            4756         5003        5003
                                                         656
2.40            5139         5139        5139
                                                         610
2.45            5495         5742        5742
                                                         639
2.50            5868         6115        6265
                                                         685
2.55            6268         6515        7665
                                                         903
3.00            6795         7042        9202
                                                         678
3.05            7191         7438        9658
                                                          96
3.10            7247         7494        9734


Ref SELl [300,5]hdtab3.tab
Table 4


NUMBER OF PEOPLE HAVING THE SAME INTERVAL OF PASSAGE THROUGH TURNSTILE C

                            INTERVAL IN SECONDS                         Mean   Total
              0    1    2     3   4   5   6   7      8   9   10   >10   Time   Count

1:50 - 2:00   0    6   11    13   15   19    9   5   3   1    3   15     6.0    100

2:00 - 2:10   0    3    7    16   20   23   12   7   3   4    1   10     5.7    106

2:10 - 2:20   1    1    4    10   17   20   10   7   4   1    1   14     6.7     90

2:20 - 2:30   1    6   20   19    21   12   16   8   6   2    1    9     5.0    121

2:30 - 2:40   0    7   26   39    25   17    8   3   5   1    1    6     4.3    138

2:40 - 2:50   2   12   23   29    21   14    9   5   7   9    1    5     4.4    137

2:50 - 3:00   4   29   47   30    19    7    5   3   1   1    6   11     3.7    163


NB Fig 4 is a visual presentation of the data in this table


Ref SELl [300,5]hdtab4.tab
                                                      LEPPINGS
                                                        LANE




                                     TERRACE   WEST STAND
                                    STANDING      SEATS      NORTH STAND
                                                                SEATS




                         TUNNEL TO CENTRE
                         TERRACE STANDING




FIG 1   SCHEMATIC PLAN SHOWING TURNSTILES A TO G AND GATE C                 HLSD 3HT TSniLE/VILLS
                                                                                   e u s id o n
                                                                           RALPH EBADK ft A8B0CIATKS
                                                                               D U W im 1 3 4 0 /M
         8000.                                                                                                        END
                                                                                                                      Of
                                                                                                                      DATA
         7000.
         6000.
         5000.
         4000.
PEOPLE
         3000.
         2000.
         1000.




         CD
                                                                                                             3.00pm
                  135.       12.0 .    105.     ■90.     75.            60.               45.   30.   15.   0.               15
                                                         TIME RELATIVE TO 3.00pm (WINS)



                 FIG.    2   TOTAL NUMBER OF PEOPLE COUNTED BY RLSD FOR TURNSTILES A to G
                                                                VERTICAL SCALE
                                                                 (No. OF PEOPLE)




                                 1.00    1.30    2.00    2.30          3.00




FIG 3   NUMBER OF PEOPLE COUNTED THROUGH TURNSTILES IN EACH 5 MINUTE INTERVAL
                                                                              RL3D 3HT HDDIFI/HIT' "
                1200.
                                START                                                                                    END
                                DATA                                                                                     DATA
                1000.
                800.
per TURNSTILE
                600.
HOUR
per
PEOPLE




                o




                o
                o




                                                                                       2.00pm
                         135.            120 ,                         75.             60.              45.   30.   0.          15.
                                                                       TIME RELATIVE TO 3.00pm (MIMS)



                        FIG.       4    RATE O f ADMISSION FOR TURNSTILES A to     G
        V

            \           \           \
                \                                                                                                o       o    o     o
                    \                                                                                            h       <U   CO    yf



                                                2:40   -   2:50                                        VERTICAL SCALE
                                                                                                           (No. OF PEOPLE)




                                                                  2: 30   -   2: 40

                            \           \                         \
                                \           \



                                                  tS
                                                                                      2:20    -       2:30




                                                                  S
                                                                                                             10      -       2:20
                                        \
                                                                          V

                                                                                  \
                                                                                      s
                                                                                                             s           A     2:0°      -   z   '    1 0



                                                              0 1         2   3       4   5       6    7     8       910
                                                                              INTERVAL IN SECS



FIG 5       TURNSTILE C - NUMBER OF PEOPLE HAVING THE SAME INTERVAL OF PASSAGE
                                                                                                                                                     RLSD 3HT HDCSEC/HILL3
            2000.
                    -




                                                                                                                                 /
            1500.




                                                                                                                          /       ■

                                          .....................................             ; .............. , / *               :.............................
                                                                                                             M
                    -


                                                                                                       X
                                                                                                           X
OF PEOPLE




                    -                                                                              /
                                                                                            1

                                                                                          X
            1000.




                                                                                         yf 1
NUMBER




                                                                                     X      :
                    -




                    -
                                                                               X                                                  :

                                                                         , x
                    -




                                                               X
            500.




                                                       .   X

                    -



                                          7k


                    I              ***
                               /
                           A
                                         --1
                                           --— 1-- 1_— J-- 1-- J-- 1-- 1--_|-- i-- L-- L_-1— — L-—1-- 1-- 1--— L— _J-- L-_J--J-- 1__ 1_...........1__ 1
                                                                                                                                                      __1_____L_____1__
                    0.                                 100.                                 200.                                  300.                                    400.
                                                                                     TIME in seconds



                    FIG.       6     NUMBER OF PEOPLE EMERGING FROM GATE C AT THE 'SECOND OPENING'
