                                                                 Incident Report



                       HEALTH AND SAFETY EXECUTIVE

                RESEARCH AND LABORATORY SERVICES DIVISION

                      Broad Lane, Sheffield S3 7HQ




                 An investigation into the number of
                 people in 'pens' 3 and 4


                                   by

                              G Norton BSc

                                              IR/L/ME/89/32




                                             Issue authorised by Dr A Jones

                                             Date: 18 December 1989


Distribution

The Court of Inquiry (5 copies)
ACC M Jones West Midlands Police
Mr D C T Eves
Dr J McQuaid
Dr A Jones
Mr A Barrell TD
Mr P G Jones TD
Mr M S Nattrass FAID Area 14
Mr J P Giltrow HFS (N)
Mr M R Stephenson NE FCG
Mr M Fountain TD3
Dr J H Foley
Dr C E Nicholson                          TO RLSD/DIAS STAFF ONLY-
Mr P F Heyes                              NOT TO BE COMMUNICATED OUTSIDE
Mr I R Price                              RLSD WITHOUT THE APPROVAL OF
Mr D Waterhouse                           THE AUTHORISING OFFICER
Mr G A C Games
Mr G Norton
Mr M James TD3                                                SMR/343/235/01
Mr C J Pertee NE FCG
Mr J B Hibbs NE FCG                                           S80.02.0TH.814
RPS
Library (2)
Registry File
CONTENTS

1   INTRODUCTION

2   PHOTOGRAPHS USED FOR COUNTING THE NUMBER OF PERSONS
    2.1 Photographs taken on 15 April 1989 showing 'pens'     2 and 3 - PR1/7A and
         PR1/8A
    2.2 Photographs taken on 22 May 1989 showing the West     Terrace when empty -
         PR10/A2 to PR10/A5
    2.3   Photographs taken on 15 April 1989 showing 'pens'   2,3 and 4 - MP1A-14
    2.4 Photograph taken on 15 April 1989 showing areas of     'pens' 3 and 4
         behind the goal area of the West Terrace - 148.3

3   DIGITISING PROCEDURES USED
    3.1   Digitising the crowd from photographs PR1/7A and PR1/8A
    3.2   Digitising the crowd from the remaining photographs
    3.3   Digitising the crush barriers from photographs PR10A-2 to PR10A-5

4   CAD MANIPULATION OF THE DIGITISED DATA
    4.1   Number of persons in the whole area of 'pen' 3
    4.2   Number of persons in rows within 'pen' 3
         4.2.1 Estimation of number of persons in the front row of 'pen' 3
    4.3   Crowd packing density in 'pen' 2
    4.4   Comparison of crowd packing density in 'pens' 3 and 4

5   RESULTS
    5.1 Number of persons in 'pen' 3 obtained from photographs PR1/7A and PR1/8A
         5.1.1    Number of persons identified directly from thephotographs
         5.1.2    Number of persons assessed by dividing the 'pen' into rows
    5.2 Number of persons in 'pens' 3 and 4 obtained from photograph MP1A-14
    5.3   Number of persons withina sample columnar area in'pen' 2
    5.4   Comparison of the number of persons in 'pens' 3 and 4

6 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
1     INTRODUCTION

Following the incident at Hillsborough Stadium, Dr Nicholson provided me with
several albums of   photographs. He told me that these had been supplied to him
by the West Midlands Police. He said that they contained some photographs of
the spectators in   'pens' 3 and 4 taken at Hillsborough Stadium and that they
had been taken at   about the time that the game commenced. He asked me to
provide him with a scientifically-based estimate of the number of persons in
'pen' 3 and in 'pen' 4, and the crowd packing density (number of persons per
square metre) in these 'pens'.

I was also provided with a dimensioned drawing showing a plan view of 'pens' 3
and 4. The drawing had been prepared by Ralph Brade & Associates, Consulting
Engineers, Sheffield, at the request of Dr Nicholson; it was numbered 1340/02
Rev A and was dated 3/5/89. I used this drawing to establish the locations of
the crush barriers in 'pens' 3 and 4 and to calculate the areas of these 'pens'.

1 was assisted in this work by Mr G A C Games, a Senior Scientific Officer of
RLSD's Mechanical Engineering Section and Mrs S M Barker of RLSD's Mechanical
Design Unit.

2     PHOTOGRAPHS USED FOR COUNTING THE NUMBER OF PERSONS

2.1    PHOTOGRAPHS TAKEN ON 15 APRIL 1989 SHOWING 'PENS' 2 AND 3 - PR1/7A AND
       PR1/8A

Two prints of the West Terrace were selected by Mr Games and myself from the
albums of photographs. These prints were labelled PR1/7A and PR1/8A. West
Midlands Police informed Dr Nicholson that these photographs were taken by a
police photographer, Mr P Rich of the South Yorkshire Police, from a fixed
position in the South Stand. The photographs were marked with a time of 15.03.
The field of view on the two photographs overlapped and by identifying the
same landmarks on each, it was possible to overlay the photographs to form a
continuous view of the crowd. The prints from the albums were too small for
further work, and I therefore requested that enlargements be provided. West
Midlands Police subsequently provided enlargements of the prints and these
were overlapped, as described above, and taped together.

2.2    PHOTOGRAPHS TAKEN ON 22 MAY 1989 SHOWING THE WEST TERRACE WHEN EMPTY -
       PR10/A2 TO PR10/A5

I could not identify the positions of barriers within the 'pens' from the
combined photographs PR1/7A and PR1/8A. Dr Nicholson therefore requested West
Midlands Police to arrange for Mr Rich, using the same equipment as used on
the day of the incident, from the same position, to take a set of overlapping
photographs which showed the empty West Terrace. Common landmarks were
identified on these prints and a subset, marked with numbers PR10/A2 to
PR10/A5, were then overlapped to form a panoramic view of the empty terrace.



2.3    PHOTOGRAPH TAKEN 15 APRIL 1989 SHOWING 'PENS' 2,3 AND 4 - MP1A-14

Other photographs taken on the day of the incident showed larger areas of the
terrace. Photograph MP1A-14, taken from the North Stand, showed a long view of
'pens' 2,3 and 4 and was marked with a time of 14.52. Dr Nicholson requested
enlargements of the photograph and these were provided by West Midlands
Police.
2.4    PHOTOGRAPH TAKEN 15 APRIL 1989 SHOWING AREAS OF 'PENS' 3 AND 4 BEHIND THE
       GOAL AREA OF THE WEST TERRACE - 148.3

Dr Nicholson provided me with two overlapping photographs, marked 148.3, which
had been obtained from the West Midlands Police. No information was available
as regards the time that the photograph was taken. On the basis of my
examination of the other photographs, the fact that several spectators were
already on the field and that the players were still on the pitch, it is
evident that it was taken at approximately 15.00. It showed a view of the
crowd in 'pens' 3 and 4 and was taken from in front of the West Terrace goal.
The photograph appeared to be taken from a position low down, possibly at
ground level. I considered it to be unsuitable for obtaining an absolute count
of the number of occupants of 'pens' 3 and 4 but that it could be used to
estimate comparative densities in these 'pens'.

3     DIGITISING PROCEDURES USED

Digitising is a means of transferring the positional data of physical points
shown in graphical material, eg photographs, into a computer file. The
graphical material to be digitised is attached to the surface of a digitising
tablet, which resembles a large drawing board. The tablet consists of a
plastic working surface, AO in size, over a closely packed grid of horizontal
and vertical wires. These wires are continually fed with electrical pulses
from the digitiser controller. To identify the points to be digitised a hand
held stylus is used; this is a 'pen' shaped device with spring loaded pointer
set in one end. When the pointer is pressed onto the surface at the point to
be digitised, a switch contact is made in the stylus enabling the pulses in
the wire grid to be detected. The time delay between sending a pulse and
receiving it at the stylus is directly proportional to the distance travelled
by the pulse and hence the stylus position. These delays are measured by the
controller equipment and translated into positions in both the horizontal and
vertical directions. This information is then transferred into a computer
file.

The information stored in the file can be accessed by a computer aided
draughting (CAD) program for subsequent graphical display and manipulation (eg
scaling).Plots of the manipulated information can be created using a pen
plotter; the figures in this report were created in this manner, the position
of each person being shown by an asterisk.

The photographs were secured to the digitiser surface, in turn, and a sheet of
transparent plastic film was placed over them. The position of every
discernible person on the photographs was digitised using the centre of the
persons head as an identification point. As the position of each person was
digitised a mark was made on the transparent film at the person's head to
ensure that no person was digitised twice. Great care was taken in the
identification of individual persons and only those people that could be
positively discerned were included in the digitising.

3.1     DIGITISING THE CROWD FROM PHOTOGRAPHS PR1/7A AND PR1/8A

The overlapping photographs PR1/7A and PR1/8A were positioned on the
digitising tablet and the boundary details were entered into the CAD system as
described in Section 3. The outlines of people outside the 'pens' who were
'masking' people within were included in this procedure.
The head of every discernible person in the crowd was digitised to produce
the drawing PR178A, Fig 1 is based on this drawing.

3.2     DIGITISING THE CROWD FROM THE REMAINING PHOTOGRAPHS

The same digitising procedures were used with photographs MP1A-14 and 148.3,
again digitising only positively discernible individuals. Figs 2 and 3 show
the digitised information from MP1A-14.

3.3     DIGITISING THE CRUSH BARRIERS FROM PHOTOGRAPHS PR10/A2 to PR10/A5

Overlapping photographs, PR10/A2 to PR10/A5, were positioned on the digitising
surface and the crush barriers, fences and wall boundaries were digitised into
the CAD system as a separate drawing.


4     CAD MANIPULATION OF THE DIGITISED DATA

4.1    NUMBER OF PERSONS IN THE WHOLE AREA OF 'PEN' 3

Drawing PR178A (Fig 1) showed asterisks representing people in part of 'pen' 2
and part of 'pen' 3. The drawing did not include all of 'pen' 3, because of
the limited view in the photographs, and therefore    an overall count forthe
'pen' could not be made using the drawing shown in Fig 1 alone.

The editing facilities of the CAD system were used on drawing PR178A to delete
the asterisks representing the occupants of 'pen' 2, and produced the drawing
shown in Fig 4. The CAD system was then used to overlay and position the
drawing made from photographs PR10/A2 to PR10/A5, as summarized in Section
3.3, on the drawing of Fig 4 by matching common landmarks on each drawing. The
resulting drawing displayed the full extent of 'pen' 3, but only contained
that part of the crowd shown on the original photographs PR1/7A and PR1/8A,
causing part of 'pen' 3 to appear to be empty.

I used the facilities of the CAD system to estimate the number of persons in
this missing part of the crowd by creating a 'patch' of the same size and
shape as the apparently empty part of 'pen' 3. This 'patch' was superimposed
on the populated area of 'pen' 3 and the resulting 'crowd patch' copied to the
apparently empty part of 'pen' 3. The resulting drawing is shown in Fig 5, the
crush barriers having been omitted for clarity and the 'crowd patch' being
shown in bold outline. I used the automatic counting facility of the CAD
system to count the number of heads (asterisks) shown on this drawing.

4.2    NUMBER OF PERSONS IN ROWS WITHIN 'PEN' 3

I was concerned about the difficulty in discerning individual heads near the
front of 'pen' 3. I also wished to have some measure of the variation of crowd
density across the depth of this 'pen'. Therefore 'pen' 3 was divided into
rows parallel to the front boundary fence. Using the crush barriers, digitised
from photographs PR10/A2 to PR10/A5, as demarcations to divide 'pen' 3 into
four parallel rows numbered from Row 1 (front row) to Row 4 (rear row) .

Using the overlaying facility of the CAD system the crush barriers were
superimposed on the drawing shown in Fig 5. The top rail of each barrier was
then projected upwards to a common scaled height of 1.7 m, assuming this
dimension to be a common height to the centre of every head. Identification of
the occupants of 'pens' 3 and 4 had been undertaken by locating the position
of each person by an asterisk at the centre of their head. I therefore assume
that any asterisk lying between adjacent projections of the top rails on the
drawing represented a person standing between the corresponding crush
barriers.

Asterisks lying outside the appropriate projected top rails were deleted for
each row in turn, leaving only asterisks representing people in that row. Any
part of the crowd missing from a row, because of the limited view on the
photographs, was estimated using the 'crowd patch' method described in Section
4.1. This technique was used to produce the drawings shown in Figs 6,7 and 8,
and the automatic counting facility of the CAD system then used to count the
number of persons in Rows 2,3 and 4.

4.2.1    Estimation of the number of persons in the front row of 'pen' 3

My uncertainty about identifying the heads of persons in the front row(row 1)
of 'pen' 3 caused me to use an alternative method to estimate the number of
persons in this row.

Some ad-hoc tests had been undertaken on RLSD's premises to assess the
discomfort experienced by persons in crowds of different packing densities.
Increasing numbers of volunteers of both sexes had stood in a closed vestibule
which had a floor area of 2.8 sq m. The criterion adopted in these tests for
determining the acceptability of different crowd packing densities was that no
person should feel physically distressed. Each test lasted approximately 2
minutes. The tests suggested that a crowd density of 10 persons/sq m could be
achieved without distress, although the subjects felt they were "packed
tightly".

I considered the crowd packing densities that were obtained in Rows 4,3 and 2,
and the results of RLSD's crowd packing tests. I then decided that the best
estimate of the number of persons in the front row of 'pen' 3 would be obtained
by multiplying the plan area (in square metres) of the front row by a packing
density of 10 persons/sq m. It is my opinion that this estimate would be
neither unrealistically high nor unrealistically low.

4.3     CROWD PACKING DENSITY IN 'PEN' 2

I estimated the crowd packing density (number of persons/sq metre) in 'pen' 2
by using similar procedures to those described in Section 4.2. Using the
drawing shown in Fig 1 a columnar area was created within 'pen' 2 by
projecting the stanchions of the front boundary fence to the back boundary
wall, the projection lines defining the width of the columnar area. All
asterisks outside this column were deleted and the missing part of the column
filled using the 'crowd patch' method to produce the drawing shown in Fig 9.
The asterisks within the columnar area were then automatically counted and,
knowing the ground area (distance between stanchions multiplied by overall
depth of 'pen'), it was possible to calculate the crowd packing density within
it.

4.4     COMPARISON OF CROWD PACKING DENSITY IN 'PENS' 3 AND 4

I used photographs 148.3 to obtain a comparison of the crowd packing densities
in 'pens' 3 and 4. Onto the drawing obtained by digitising photographs 148.3, a
fixed rectangular area was superimposed in 'pens' 3 and 4. This rectangle was
not intended to represent a specific ground area on the terraces, but rather
to define an area on the original photographs. An automatic count of the heads
 (asterisks) within the rectangular area in each 'pen' was then obtained. This
 procedure was repeated at different locations until 4 sets of counts had been
 obtained, at the positions shown in Fig 10, taking care to ensure that
 obstructions e.g. persons outside the terrace, did not protrude into the
 rectangular areas.

 5     RESULTS

 5.1     NUMBER OF PERSONS IN 'PEN' 3 OBTAINED FROM PHOTOGRAPHS PR1/7A AND PR1/8A

 5.1.1    Number of persons identified directly from the photographs

The number of persons counted automatically within 'pen' 3, on the basis of
the number of heads directly identified with the digitising method, was 1074.
To this must be added the number of persons in that part of the 'pen' not
shown on the photographs but estimated by the 'crowd patch' method ie 334.
This results in a total figure of 1408. It is my opinion that this total is an
underestimate of the number of persons within 'pen' 3; lack of clarity in the
photographs made it difficult to identify individual heads near the front
boundary wall and also people outside the 'pen' obscured parts of this area.

5.1.2     Number of persons assessed bv dividing the 'pen' into rows

Table 1 shows my alternative assessment of the number of persons within 'pen'       3,
based on the division of the 'pen' into four rows. Persons in Rows 4,3 and 2
were identified directly from the photographs using the digitiser and 'crowd
patch' methods and counted automatically. The number of persons in the front
row (Row 1) were estimated on the basis of the plan area of the row and a
crowd packing density of 10 persons/sq    m. Thisalternative andpreferred
assessment of the number of persons in    'pen' 3is 1576.

Table 1 also shows the crowd packing densities for each of the four rows in
'pen' 3. Thecrowd packing densities for Rows 4,3 and 2 are based on the number
of persons identified with the digitiser and 'crowd patch' methods from
photographs whilst that for Row 1 is a value assumed on the basis of tests
made at RLSD.

5.2     NUMBER OF PERSONS IN 'PENS' 3 AND 4 OBTAINED FROM PHOTOGRAPH MP1A-14

Table 2 shows the number   of persons in  'pens' 3and 4 obtainedby using the
automatic counting facility of the CAD    system,after they had been identified
on photograph MP1A-14, using the digitising method.

It was extremely difficult to differentiate between individual heads on
photograph MP1A-14 and only those heads that could be definitely identified
were digitised. I consider this to be the reason for obtaining a count of 678
persons in 'pen' 3 from photograph MP1A-14, a number which is low compared to
the 1408 persons counted from photographs PR1/7A and PR1/8A and to my
preferred estimate of 1576 persons.

It is my opinion that the counts of 678 persons in 'pen' 3 and 821 persons in
'pen' 4 should be regarded as being unrealistically low. It is also my
opinion that I obtained a much more reliable assessment of the number of
persons in 'pen' 3 from the counts and estimate based on photographs PR1/7A and
PR1/8A.

Whilst the above figures cannot be used as a total count for the 'pens' I
believe they can be used to compare crowd densities. The ground areas of
'pens' 3 and 4 are very similar (see table 1) and I consider that the counts
obtained suggest that the crowd packing densities in 'pens' 3 and 4 were also
similar. The larger count in 'pen' 4 can be partially attributed to the angle
and position from which the photograph was taken, which enabled easier
identification of individual heads in 'pen' 4 than in 'pen' 3.

5.3    NUMBER OF PERSONS WITHIN A SAMPLE COLUMNAR AREA OF 'PEN' 2

A total of 150 persons occupied a sample columnar area taken from the front
boundary wall to the rear boundary wall of 'pen' 2. The corresponding crowd
packing density was 5.0 persons/sq m.

5.4    COMPARISON OF THE NUMBER OF PERSONS IN 'PENS' 3 AND 4

Table 3 summarizes the number of persons identified within different areas of
the same size at four locations in each 'pen'. Although the numbers of persons
should not be regarded as absolute values, because of the difficulty in clear
identification, it is my opinion that they do serve to compare the crowd
packing densities in 'pens' 3 and 4.

Making allowance for the difficulty in identifying persons, I consider the
differences between the numbers obtained in each of the four comparisons to be
small. Additionally, there is no distinct bias to suggest an appreciable
difference between the crowd packing densities in 'pens' 3 and 4; this is
confirmed by the close agreement obtained between the average values of the
four sample counts made for each 'pen'.

6     SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

6.1 I used photographs supplied by West Midlands Police, together with a
drawing prepared by Ralph Brade & Associates, as the basis for my assessment
of the number of persons in parts of the West Terrace of Sheffield Wednesday
Football Club's Hillsborough Stadium. I used the facilities provided by a
computer-aided draughting system to assist in identifying and counting the
number of persons within 'pens' on the West Terrace.

6.2 In making my assessment I assumed that a crowd packing density in one
part of 'pen' 3 was reproduced in another, adjacent part of it. Additionally, I
was unable to obtain an acceptably accurate count of the persons between the
front boundary wall and the nearest line of crush barriers in 'pen' 3 by the
direct identification of heads on photographs. I therefore estimated the
number of persons in this area of 'pen' 3 from considerations of the crowd
packing densities in other areas of the 'pen', together with results from an
investigation of packing densities made on RLSD's premises. It is my opinion,
based on a study of photographs of 'pens' 3 and 4, that my assumption and
estimation were justified.

6.3 My best assessment of the number of persons within 'pen' 3 is that 1576
persons were present at 15.03 hours on 15 April 1989. It is my opinion that
1576 persons is unlikely to be an overestimate of the true number. It
represents an average crowd packing density in 'pen' 3 of 8.4 persons/sq m,
which exceeds the maximum value of 5.4 persons/sq m recommended in "Guide To
Safety At Sports Grounds" (ref 1) by 56%

6.4     The crowd packing density within 'pen' 3 increased between the rear
boundary wall and the line of crush barriers nearest to the front boundary
wall. My lowest assessment of the crowd packing density in 'pen' 3 had an
average value of 7.5 persons/sq m, this occurring in the area between the rear
boundary wall and the rearmost line of crush barriers. The highest crowd
packing density that I was able to assess directly had an average value of
8.1 persons/sq m, and this occurred in the area between the line of crush
barriers nearest the pitch and the next line of crush barriers. These crowd
packing densities exceed the maximum value recommended in "Guide To Safety At
Sports Grounds" by 39% and 50% respectively.

6.5 I assessed the average crowd packing density in 'pen' 2 at 15.03 hours to
be of the order of 5 persons/sq m.

6.6 I was unable to assess the number of persons in 'pen' 4 by a direct
counting method and I used a technique that compared the packing densities in
'pen' 4 with those in 'pen' 3. This comparison has caused me to conclude that at
approximately 15.00 hours the packing densities in 'pens' 3 and 4 were nominally
the same.
Table 1     Number of Dersons in 'Den' 3 and their packing densities at
            15.03 hours on 15 ADril 1989. based on photographs PR1/7A and
            PR1/8A

Row No                         Number of persons    Crowd packing density
                                                    (persons/sq m)

4 (Rear)                       268                  7.5
(Fig 8)

3                              382                  7.6
(Fig 7)

2                              409                  8.1
(Fig 6)

1 (Front)                      517                 10.0 (assumed)

                           1576 total               8.4 mean value


Table 2     Number of persons in 'pens' 3 and 4 and their packing densiHp.s
            on 15 April 1989. based on photogranh MP1A-14

'pen' No                   Number of persons       Area (sq m)


'pen' 3                        678                  188
(Fig 2)

'pen' 4                     821                     192
(Fig 3)
                          1499 (total)              380 (total)


Table 3    Comparison of number of persons within sample areas of the*
           same size in 'pens' 3 and 4

                          Number of persons within a sample
                          area of the same size (see Fig 10)

                           'pen' 3                  'pen' 4

First comparison          44                       56

Second comparison         56                       49

Third comparison          45                       51

Fourth comparison         50                       41

Mean comparison           48.75                    49.25
REFERENCES

1   Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds (1986)
    HMSO
    ISBN 0 11 340840 4
         DIGITISED DRAWING OF PHOTOGRAPHS PR1-7A & PR1-8A




                                                            PEN




P EN 2




                       HEADCOUNT   -   1419
                      PHOTOGRAPHS TAKEN 15.03




                                                                    FIG 1
                                                                         BASED ON
                                                                  HLSD SHT FR178A/FP1131
          DIGITISED DRAWING OF PHOTOGRAPH MP1A-14
     SHOWING RAISED 1ST BARRIER & PEN DIVIDING FENCES


                              OCCUPANTS OF PEN 3 SHOWN




                                                             PEN

        PEN                   sv \          **•
Op


              •*C*w •• *4** *v* *•* •y
                                     \ *»v*•**• «• *
                                             •*,vi
                                                    *.*v
                                                   •*•/
                                                    »*•t
              il,*V#‘
                l* •        •-»** l • •
                                      %*^5;5rn
                                            1 * H!*♦***•
                                                       1           PEN 4
              i ^ X * •* * ^vrW*. \               J




                                                                           o




                                  HEADCOUNT                678

                              PHOTOGRAPHS TAKEN 14.52




                                                                                 FIG 2
                                                                                      BASED ON
                                                                               KLSD SHT MP114E/FP1131
    DIGITISED DRAWING OF PHOTOGRAPH MP1A-14
SHOWING RAISED 1ST BARRIER & PEN DIVIDING FENCES


                OCCUPANTS OF PEN 4 SHOWN
 (NB   ESTIMATED CROWD - 84 OCCUPANTS - SHOWN HATCHED)




                                                         PEN 4
   PEN 2
                       PEN 3
                                          *****




                 HEADCOUNT       821

                PHOTOGRAPHS TAKEN 14.52




                                                                   FIG 3
                                                                        BASED ON
                                                                 HLSD SHT MF114F/FP1131
    DIGITISED DRAWING OF PHOTOGRAPHS PR1-7A & PR1-8A
               OCCUPANTS OF PEN 2 DELETED




                                              • • ••




                                                       «•   •   ••




2




                   HEADCOUNT   -   1074
                  PHOTOGRAPHS TAKEN 15.03




                                                                       FIG 4
                                                                            BASED ON
                                                                     RLSD SHT PR178B/PP1131
            DIGITISED DRAWING OF PHOTOGRAPHS PR1-7A & PR1-8A
                             SUPERIMPOSED ON
DIGITISED DRAWING OF PHOTOGRAPHS PR10A-2 TO PR10A-5, SCALED ETC TO MATCH


                             OCCUPANTS OF PEN 3 SHOWN
             (NB   ESTIMATED CROWD - 334 OCCUPANTS - SHOWN HATCHED)




                             HEADCOUNT   -    1408

                            PHOTOGRAPHS TAKEN 15.03




                                                                            FIG 5
                                                                                 based on
                                                                           KLSD SHT PEN3/FP1131
            DIGITISED DRAWING OF PHOTOGRAPHS PR1-7A Sc PR1-8A
                             SUPERIMPOSED ON
DIGITISED DRAWING OF PHOTOGRAPHS PR10A-2 TO PR10A-5, SCALED ETC TO MATCH

                                      PEN 3
                          OCCUPANTS OF ROW 2 ONLY SHOWN
             (NB   ESTIMATED CROWD - 118 OCCUPANTS - SHOWN HATCHED)
                                  PERIMETER OF i=Hl-7A/FRl-8A




                                                                           PEN 4
                                                    PEN 3
                                                                           -■n




PEN 2




                              HEADCOUNT           -        409

                            PHOTOGRAPHS TAKEN 15.03




                                                                              FIG 6
                                                                                   BASED ON
                                                                            RLSD SHT FR178E/PP1131
            DIGITISED DRAWING OF PHOTOGRAPHS PR1-7A Sc PR1-8A
                             SUPERIMPOSED ON
DIGITISED DRAWING OF PHOTOGRAPHS PR10A-2 TO PR10A-5, SCALED ETC TO MATCH

                                       PEN 3
                           OCCUPANTS OF ROW 3 ONLY SHOWN
              (NB   ESTIMATED CROWD - 60 OCCUPANTS - SHOWN HATCHED)
                                  PERIMETER OF PHI—7A/FR1-6A




                                                                           PEN 4


                                                               PEN 3




 PEN 2




                              HEADCOUNT           -       382

                             PHOTOGRAPHS TAKEN 15.03




                                                                              FIG 7
                                                                                   BASED ON
                                                                            RLSD SET PR178D/FP1131
                                DIGITISED DRAWING OF PHOTOGRAPHS PR1-7A & PR1-8A
                                                 SUPERIMPOSED ON
                    DIGITISED DRAWING OF PHOTOGRAPHS PR10A-2 TO PR10A-5, SCALED ETC TO MATCH

                                                     PEN 3
                                         OCCUPANTS OF ROW 4 ONLY SHOWN

                                                 PERIMETER OP FH1-7A/FR1-6A




                                                                              • • ••




                                   r '                                                            PEN 4
                                                                                             T"
                                                                                       r "
                                                                                                  - -■n
                                                                              PEN 3

        - - 1
r ~ ~

                PEN 2




                                             HEADCOUNT           -       268

                                            PHOTOGRAPHS TAKEN 15.03




                                                                                                          FIG 8
                                                                                                           BASED ON
                                                                                                    RLSD SET ER178C/PP113
                    DIGITISED DRAWING OF PHOTOGRAPHS PR1-7A Sc PR1-8A
                                     SUPERIMPOSED ON
        DIGITISED DRAWING OF PHOTOGRAPHS PR1QA-2 TO PR10A-5, SCALED ETC TO MATCH

                                            PEN 2
                          OCCUPANTS OF FRONT TO BACK SLICE AS SHOWN

                                        PERIMETER OF FBI—7A/FR1—BA




                                                     -' 1   '




                                                                                   r '   PEN 4
                                                                      - -1
                                                                             PEN




PEN 2




                                    HEADCOUNT          -        150

                                  PHOTOGRAPHS TAKEN 15.03




                                                                                             FIG 9
                                                                                                  BASED ON
                                                                                           HLSD SET FE178F/FP1131
     DIGITISED DRAWINGS OF PHOTOGRAPHS 148.3
     COMPARING CROWD DENSITIES IN PENS 3 & 4


                                                   HATCHED AREA HEADCOUNT
It
                                                         PEN 3 - 4 4
                                                         PEN 4    -    56




                                                        PEN 3 - 5 6
                                                        PEN 4 - 4 9




                                                        PEN 3 - 4 5
                                                        PEN 4 - 5 1




                                                        PEN 3 - 5 0
                                                        PEN 4 - 4 1



                                               AVERAGE HATCHED AREA COUNTS

                                                      PEN 3   -       48.75
                                                      PEN 4   -       49.25
                                                                               F I G 10
                                                                                     BASED ON
                                                                              KLSD SET P1483E/FF1131
