                                            ~ 60 -                                                                                —          ."Z
                                                                  Reference ........................................................... I.^ v . j

                                                                                      SME/196/292/016
                                                                                      SME/956/02




               Mr A D Osborne, Solicitors Office
               Mr H Cavanagh, Area Director
               Dr L Derrick, SPD




               BSE WORKING PARTY CN CROWD SAFETY


               The attached canments by Professor Canter of the University of Surrey may be of
               interest. This document was one of a number of papers circulated to
               Dr Nicholson for background reading as a member of the Technical Working Party
               on the Green Guide.

                              has suggested that it may be of interest to members of the HSE
               Working Party and is therefore copied direct in order that you may study it
               prior to the first meeting on Monday, 13 November.




               PS TO ER NICHOISON
               SAFETY ENGINEERING LABORATORY 1, RISD, SHEFFIELD

               6 November 1989




CODE   18-77
if££
                                                    TD3/5A

DR L DERRICK                                cc. Mr Fountain H/TD3 }
H/SPD.D                                         Mr Anderson H/TD3B}
RM.236                                                      TD3B }
BAYNARDS HOUSE




                           HILLSBOROUGH

Belated thanks for your minute of 19.9.89 which for some reason
was not received in TD (copy obtained via                      on
10.10.89 after Alan Jones of RLSD had rung me to discuss the
matter!).


I am happy for TD (Eng) to participate in the proposed working
group on crowd safety and nominate:


                       PSI/TD3B to represent our interests (your
              was advised of this on 19.10.89).


It is most appropriate the working group is becoming active at
this time as it will enable an agreed HSE line to be fed into the
Hillsborough Inquiry Working Group, formed to consider revision of
the Home Office Green Guide!   Our representative on this Inquiry
WG is Dr Chris Nicholson, RLSD and I suggested to him (via
Dr Alan Jones, D/SEL) that he be properly briefed by (at least)
TD/FAID/SPD.D3 before attending meetings.   I believe this
suggestion has been activated, which should therefore enable us to
link our development of policy in this area with the Inquiry Team
thinking on the subject.


I look forward to some useful output from these initiatives.




P G JONES
DCI(ENG)/TD
23 October 1989
ll£ 0

        *4
          V
      u



                                            cc Mr   Hodgkins SPD
                                               Mr   Linehan, GIF
                                               Dr   McQuaid, RLSD
               RECEIVED in THE OFFICE O f
                                               Mr   P G Jones, TD
                                               Mr   Cavanaah. AD-A018
                    THE DIRECTOR



               TECHNO                         Mr Barrell, TD
                                              Mr A Jones, RLSD




Dr Derrick
SPD-D



HILLSBOROUGH


On 19 September you wrote to Mr P G Jones, copied to other
interested parties, about the setting up of a working group to
discuss crowd safety.


We have decided that FAID's representative should be Mr Cavanagh
of North West Area. The Entertainment NIG, as part of FAID, will
not need separate representation.




16 October 1989
#
                                                                      M ix


Mr P G Jones, DCI (Eng) TD

                                                  cc: Mr D Hodgkins, SPD
                                                      Mr J McQuaid, RLSD
                                                      Mr F Lindsay. APAU

                      R e iv e d        o f n ^ 0 ^ Mr H Cavana9h ' E n t - N I G
                                   in the
                           th e d ir e c to r
                             28 SEP 1939
                     T e c h n o lo g y   d iv is io n
                                                         Mr A Jones, RLSD



HILLSBOROUGH

Thank you for your minute of 7 September about Hillsborough and
policy on overcrowding.  I am sorry TD was not copied in on the
original correspondence and will copy TD in on any future
correspondence.

The main policy work being done at present on overcrowding is the
joint SPD C4 and SPD D3 literature search.  Initial views are that
relevant material is sparse and of little use to HSE in policy
formation.  Preliminary contacts with outside bodies suggest that
current practice is very diverse and that an HSE initiative would
be helpful.

A working group would be a sensible way of developing policy.
The many strands of research, technical development and policy in
HSE that are involved means that a pooling of expertise is
important.  I envisage its main task as being the initiation and
co-ordination of research into the general issues of crowd safety,
followed by the production of guidance if that is considered
desirable.  It could also co-ordinate further HSE contributions to
the Hillsborough Enquiry and any HSE input to the Home Office
"Green Book".

I attach an annex with draft terms of reference for the meeting to
consider and a list of possible members.  If other names occur to
yourself or others please suggest they attend the meeting. My
secretary will be in touch to arrange a date in mid-October.




LINDA DERRICK
SPD D

19 September 1989




dl\14
Draft Terms of Reference for HSE Working Group on Crowd Safety



To examine the research literature, current guidance and good
practice on crowd safety in outdoor spaces (concerts, shows,
railway termini etc) where the crowd is generally mobile, and
consider the development of HSE policy and guidance on crowd
safety in public spaces.


To co-ordinate the presentation of HSE policy on crowd safety.



Representatives from the following are invited


Mr J McQuaid, RLSD
Mr F Lindsay, APAU
Mr H Cavanagh, Entertainment NIG
                   Medical Division
Mr P G Jones, TD




Invitations could be extended to OGDs and outside bodies when the
working group is underway.




DL\15
/
i m-3
