HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER - STATEMENT ON BEHALF OF HILLSBOROUGH
DISASTER WORKING PARTY OF LIVERPOOL CITY COUNCIL


A Joint Liverpool - Nottingham Campaign has been launched to reÂ­
state the truth about the Hillsborough Disaster in which 96
football fans died in 1989. The move was sparked by comments from
former Nottiingham Forest Manager Brian Clough in his
autobiography in which he blamed Liverpool Supporters for causing
the tragedy. It is also a response to similar unsubstantiated
comments made by Sir fiernard Ingham earlier in 1994.

The Leaders of Liverpool and Nottingham City Councils and the
Chairmen of Liverpool F.C. and Nottingham Forest F.C. have signed
a joint statement re-affirming the conclusions embodied in the
Report of Lord Justice Taylor who after a thorough judicial
investigation of the evidence established that the fans were
blameless. The statement is also supported by members of bereaved
families, survivors and the Football Supporters Association.

Donna Carlile, who lost her 19 year old brother Paul at
Hillsborough said "What we want to do is put the record straight
once and for all. I have repeatedly sought meetings with Brian
Clough but he refuses to speak to me."

Civic leaders from both Councils have been united in their outrage
at Clough's remarks. Indeed the joint statement is an initiative
first mooted by the Liverpool born M.P. for Nottingham South, Alan
Simpson and he has also signed the statement in, as he says, "A
tribute to the truth".


23&o
