NOTES OF A MEETING OF THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER WORKING PARTY HELD
                       ON 11TH NOVEMBER 1996

PRESENT:-

Councillor Jack Spriggs - Chair
Councillors Peter Allen, Margaret Clarke, Eddie Clein, Eileen
Devaney, George Knibb, Peter Millea, Len Tyrer and Geraldine
Wilson.
Eddie Loyden M.P., members of bereaved families, survivors, Dr.
Phil Scraton of Edgehill College, officers of the Working Party
and representatives of the Directors of Social Services and
Education also attended.

Apologies for absence were submitted from Councillors Bill Craig,
Alan Dean and Steve Ellison and also from Peter Kilfoyle M.P.,
Jane Kennedy M.P. and Sheila Coleman.



Compensation Claims - South Yorkshire Police Officers

The meeting commenced with a discussion of the successful appeal
made to the Court of Appeal hy four police officers employed by_
South Yorkshire Police at the time of the Disaster for damages in
respect of post traumatic stress disorder caused by their
involvement as "rescuers" in the Disaster.
There was general concern about the unfairness of the present
state of the law which had allowed claims for damages by
professional "rescuers" but which had disqualified many bereaved
families who had made similar claims. Many people had suffered
trauma but ironically it appeared that those who were present only
because they were in paid employment - ambulance officers it -was
noted had also received compensation from the Chief Constable -
were receiving favourable treatment when it could be questioned
why they should receive compensation at all for doing their job.
One suggestion was that if the claimants had been amongst the
officers who had pushed the fans back into the pens, their trauma
may have been caused by their feelings of guilt. Whether or not
the police officers should be able to claim damages was generally
considered to be a separate issue, although it highlighted the
unfair treatment of families. It was thought that there would be
wide support across the political spectrum for a change in the law
to rectify this injustice.
Eddie Loyden M.P. indicated that an early day motion about the
issue had been circulated in Parliament by the Liverpool Members
of Parliament. This would draw attention to the issue but it would
be preferable if an adjournment debate was sought on the issue
with, if possible a pre-meeting with appropriate Ministers. The
support of members of the Shadow Cabinet could be sought. Mr.
Loyden emphasised that it would be extremely useful to seek
Counsel's opinion upon precisely how the law could be changed.
A suggestion was made that another way to raise the profile of the
issue amongst the public would be to organise a petition calling
for a change in the law which could be presented to the Prime
Minister, although the logistics of gathering such a petition were
questioned. Perhaps Liverpool and Everton would allow leaflets to
be placed in their programmes?
The possibility was discussed of utilising the successful actions
of these police officers, which had through a court of law
demonstrated the negligence of their senior officers, in now
making those senior officers and South Yorkshire Police
accountable for their negligence.

Guatemalan Disaster

The action so far taken by the Council following the Guatemalan
Disaster, including the message of condolence sent by the Lord
Mayor, was discussed. The meeting shared astonishment that a
Disaster so similar to Hillsborough had occurred again at another
football stadium showing that FIFA had not learned the lessons of
1989 with regard to the dangers presented by fencing -
particularly those as barbaric as effectively led to the Disaster
in the Mateo Flores Stadium in Guatemala City. It was agreed that
the Committee Clerk would write to FIFA to ascertain their views
as to why they had not previously refused to sanction games played
behind fences and the precise details of their reported intention
to now belatedly institute such a practice.

The question of what practical assistance the City may be able to
offer the bereaved in Guatemala was discussed and it was agreed
that the officers of the Working Party should discuss this with
representatives of the Family Support Group, who have attempted to
make some initial contacts, with a view to establishing what is
feasible and reporting back to the next meeting.

"Hillsborough" Television Programme

The Working Party considered arrangements being made in
conjunction with Granada Television and the families in respect of
the d r a m a /documentary concerning the Disaster which is to be
screened by ITV on 5th December 1996.
|            |, representing the Director of Social Services
 confirmed that a helpline service would be established following
 the programme in Seel Street. It would operate on the night and
 into the next day. The Alder Centre it was anticipated would also
 operate a helpline.
There was to be a screening of the programme for families in
advance of the television broadcast. This would be at the Neptune
Theatre on Sunday 1st November, 1996 with the theatre being
provided free of charge by the Council. Paramedics would be in
attendance in case the programme created any distress. The
question of whether other parties such as survivors and Members of
the Working Party would be able to attend was discussed and the
officers were asked to continue to investigate this possibility.
It was stressed that this may not be feasible due to potential
legal difficulties related to the confidentiality of the contents
of the programme which this may cause.
The Working Party were also informed of the Press Launch for the
programme to be held in London on 27th November and although this
was Council day a request was made to look at whether or not the
Working Party would be represented in some way.

The meeting, at the instigation of John Glover, had given some
consideration to new evidence, relating to missing video tapes of
the Disaster, which it was hoped would result from the
investigations made by the programme makers. This could be
discussed at the next meeting.

Hillsborough Bursaries and administration of Trust Fund

The Trust Fund had allocated to the five Merseyside District
Councils Â£75,000 over 10 years for educational bursaries to be
awarded under strict criteria insisted upon by the Trust Fund
Manager. This was despite strong protests by the Working Party
that these particular criteria would effectively exclude many
members of bereaved families from making an application. The^
Director of Education was asked to report back upon the detailed
arrangements which had been made for the dispersal of the
bursaries, as there was concern that the bursaries were not being
used at all at present.
Phil Scraton said that he and many of the families had become
increasingly angry with many aspects of the administration of the
Trust Fund and believed that lessons from the failings of previous
similar funds had not been learned. Substantial amounts had been
donated to institutions which although no doubt worthy causes in
their own right, were clearly not directly related to the Disaster
- and yet most people who had contributed to the Fund had done so
on the basis that it would help to meet the financial needs of
those most directly affected. A specific question was raised about
the record made by Gerry Marsden for the Fund and Colin Moneypenny
was asked to investigate this by, if possible, writing to Mr.
Marsden.
There continued to be widespread concern, reflected again at this
meeting about the accountability of trustees of Disaster funds and
it was agreed to look at any further action which could be taken
to ensure that in future, if such funds need to be established,
those charged with making the decisions for spending the
accumulated funds, are accountable in some way for such decisions.
It was suggested that these concerns could be explored with the
Charity Commission. It was also agreed to supply as many people as
possible with a copy of the Final Accounts of the Fund.
