                             The City of Liverpool
                              Personnel & Administration Directorate
                             Head o f Committee & Member Services
                             Ken Corns
                             PO Box 88, Municipal Buildings, Dale Street, Liverpool L69 2DH.
                             Tel: 051 -225 2430 Fax: 051 -225 2427



24 January 1995                           Enquiries to: Mr Moneypenny
                                          Direct Line: 051 225 2431
                                          Your Ref:
                                          Our Ref:      MFCDA/CM/LM


TO:   All Members of:-

       (i) the Hillsborough Disaster Working Party; and

      (ii) the Ground Safety Working Group.



Dear Sir/Madam,
     You are requested to attend a JOINT MEETING of the
HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER WORKING PARTY of the Policy and Resources
Committee and the GROUND SAFETY ADVISORY GROUP of the Licensing
Committee to be held at 12.00 NOON on MONDAY, 30TH JANUARY, 1995
in a Committee Room in the Municipal Annexe, Dale Street,
Liverpool.
     The purpose of the meeting which has been summoned following
consultation with the Chair of both Panels (Councillor Jack
Spriggs) and in accordance with the request of a previous meeting
of the Hillsborough Working Party will be to view and consider the
contents of the Dispatches Television Programme which contained
allegations of poor safety standards at certain English Football
Grounds.
     A copy of a letter from the Chief Executive of the Football
Licensing Authority responding to the allegations contained in the
Programme is enclosed for your attention.

                                     Yours faithfully




                                      Ken Corns
                                Head of Committee and
                                   Member Services




al/ottoo/mfoda/l-efcfcer/IIillWkPfc1
                     Director o f Personnel & Administration: Derek Griffin
             Commercial Services; Committee & Member Services; Human Resources;
        Information Technology; Legal Services; Management Support; Public Relations.
           Football Licensing Authority
                       Chairman Norman Jacobs

                                                      27 Harcourt House
                                                      19 Cavendish Square
                                                      London W lM 9AD
                                                      Tel: 0171-491 7191
                                                      Fax:0171-491 1882

Ken Corns Esq
Head of Committee and Member Services
City of Liverpool
P O Box 88
Municipal Buildings
Dale Street
LIVERPOOL   L69 2DH                             12 December 1994




DISPATCHES PROGRAMME

Thank you for your letter informing me of the motion agreed by
the City Council following this programme.

I fully appreciate the concern expressed by your Members at any
apparent widespread incidence of safety failures at football
grounds.  You should be aware, however, that, in this instance,
these concerns are misplaced. As your Members will no doubt know
from personal experience, not every story which appears in the
media is automatically balanced and accurate.

Following    the    transmission    of   the    programme,   the
Football Licensing Authority immediately investigated all the
specific allegations made.    In a few minor cases, for instance
stewards celebrating goals or smoking while on duty, the facts
stated were correct. The failures concerned were tackled. Where
appropriate firm disciplinary action was taken.

The vast majority of the allegations, however, were either
spurious, apparently staged for the benefit of the cameras,
misleadingly described or simply untrue. All the specific cases
put t o m e personally fall into the latter two categories.

I do not imagine that you wish to receive a detailed critique of
every allegation contained in the programme.      The following
comments concentrate on broad issues, though I would be happy to
elaborate further.

Paragraph 209 of the Guide to Safety at Sports Ground (the
"Green Guide") advises that "smoking should be discouraged in
stands which are constructed of, or contain, combustible or
flammable items or materials".    However, being built out of
timber does not of itself make a stand unsafe.  It is for each
certifying authority, on the advice of the fire service, to
consider whether smoking should be prohibited so as to ensure the
reasonable safety of spectators.      Factors to be taken into
account include the design and construction of the stand, the
nature and extent of fire separation/fire proofing, the means of
escape and the type and location of fire detection devices.    In
some cases smoking is permitted but the capacity of the stand is
reduced.   The programme did not show any cases of soectatoâ€™'^
smoking where this was not permitted.

Unstaffed locked exit gates were a serious problem in the early
days of the FLA which was attacked with vigour.       The FLA has
always insisted that every exit gate must be capable of being
opened easily and immediately without use of a key in an
emergency.   Such gates are also required to be continuously
stewarded, though this requirement may be relaxed where the door
can be opened by use of a theatre style push bar. Only one gate
shown in the programme was genuinely both locked and unstaffed.
This was in an area of the ground to which the public do not have
access. The picture appears to have taken at long range through
a grille. In other instances, the gates were not locked. It has
been suggested that, in some cases at least, the camera was
carefully angled to produce the desired effect.    The concertina
gates shown at one ground were not, as was implied, a spectator
exit but rather the entrance for service vehicles and the fire
brigade.

Paragraph 145 of the Green Guide states that gangways on standing
terraces should be painted in conspicuous colours.     This is to
enable them to be kept clear and properly identified.        This
requirement does not apply to seated stands though some clubs
have chosen to paint such gangways.

Rubbish should not be left lying around   inconcourses. However,
in both the examples shown on the programme, there were no
spectators in the ground at the time.   All the produce for the
refreshment stalls is unpacked and the boxes are cleared away
before the ground opens.

Stewarding remains one of the most difficult areas on which to
achieve  a satisfactory standard.         It requires effective
management and the inculcation of a safety culture atall levels
within a club.    This is not something that can be achieved
overnight by outside regulation.   While clubs have come a long
way in the last few years, the FLA is the first to admit that
more still needs to be done. Again I would be happy to take you
in detail through what the FLA has been doing both to define and
promote good standards of stewarding and to get certifying
authorities to act, for example by reducing capacities of
grounds, where the stewarding is inadequate.

As you can imagine, the programme caused great offence to
certifying authorities, clubs and indeed the FLA.    A number of
clubs    among    them    Sunderland,    Bradford    City    and
Sheffield Wednesday, supported by their certifying authorities,
issued detailed rebuttals which were widely and sympathetically
reported by the local press.    I am informed that one club has
taken successful legal action against a national newspaper which
repeated and commented upon the programme's allegations. There
is also much resentment at the coincidence between certain
incidents and the presence of the television crew. For example,
at one ground toilets were blocked with paper a few minutes
before half time causing congestion in the concourse, which was
duly filmed; at another a paper towel was set on fire in a
toilet - this being the first fire at the club for seven years.

As the then Lord Justice Taylor said, "complacency is the enemy
of safety".   Had the programme served to remind people of the
dangers of complacency, it might have served some useful purpose.
I believe, however, that its effect has been counter-productive.
Because it was considered as seriously unbalanced and as pursuing
a predetermined goal, but nevertheless failed to uncover more
than a few trivial failings, certifying authorities and clubs
have on the whole tended to react against it.     Yet, as the FLA
has repeatedly and publicly made clear, while much progress has
been made, much more remains to be done.

The relevant officers of Liverpool City Council will be aware of
the powers, approach, standards and commitment of the FLA to
safety at football grounds.    These are applied with equal and
consistent vigour in all parts of the country.     Indeed if you
were to speak to your counterparts in other authorities in the
North West, you would find that they are more likely to complain
that the FLA is over stringent.

I am likely to be visiting Liverpool fairly early in the
New Year.   I would be happy to meet you or Members of your
Authority if that would help.




                                                       _




                                         J R K DE QUIDT
                                         Chief Executive
