RESOLUTION OF THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER WORKING PARTY - 6TH
DECEMBER 199 6

Resolved that this Working Party -

(A) congratulates writer Jimmy McGovern and Granada Television for
their production of the television drama/documentary programme
"Hillsborough", broadcast by Independent Television on 5th
December, 1996;

(B) notes that the programme:-

     (i) provided a factual re-construction of events surrounding
     the Disaster and its aftermath based on the issues of justice
     and accountability for the bereaved families of the Disaster
     - the issues upon which this Working Party was created in
     April 1989; and

     (ii) has, through its research, revealed significant new and
     unused evidence about the Disaster which may enable further
     legal proceedings related to the Disaster to be pursued and
     justice to be obtained.

(C) supports the action taken by the Liaison Officer to the
Working Party, in full consultation with the Family Support Group
and the Chair of the Working Party, seeking legal advice on the
options which may now be available following the disclosures which
have resulted from the programme;

(D) places on record its appreciation of the overwhelmingly fair
and favourable coverage by most newspapers, radio and television
stations and in particular of the "Daily Mirror", and their
journalist Brian Reade, who have specifically raised at a national
level many of the questions related to justice which have been
asked by this Working Party since 1989 and which are now being
asked more widely as a result of the broadcast of the programme;

(E) also places on record its thanks to the Social Services
Department, Liverpool Personal Services Society and the Alder-
Centre for their roles in establishing and staffing the helplines
which were available to the public during and after the
transmission of the Programme;

(F) calls for a wider campaign for justice for the families to be
established on terms to be determined in conjunction with the
Hillsborough families and requests that all District Councils,
particularly those on Merseyside and appropriate parts of
Lancashire and Cheshire, be requested to fully support and
participate in this campaign;

(G) requests that the Chief Executive of the Football Association
be asked to provide the views of that organisation about the
programme and also be requested to offer the support of the F.A.
for the campaign which is being established;
(H) assures families that the Council will initiate discussions
which will address the issue of the financing of any arising
campaign of action;

(I) requests the Director of Education to investigate any reaction
to the programme which may have taken place within the schools of
the City, to provide positive support for any child who may have
been disturbed by the contents of the Programme and if appropriate
to report back to the Working Party on these issues;

  (J) requests that appropriate arrangements be made to requisition
  a Special Meeting of the City Council to be held as soon as
 possible prior to Christmas 1996 in order to discuss the relevant
  courses of action which can be pursued by the Council on behalf of
  the bereaved families in respect of the various issues which have
  arisen as a result of the transmission of the *'Hillsborough" TV
. Programme and in particular the new and unused evidence which,
  researchers from the Programme have discovered;

 (K) requests that Jimmy McGovern be invited to address the meeting
 of the Council and that the journalist Brian Reade also be invited
 in recognition of his role in raising the national profile of the
 campaign for justice of the families:

(L) all M.P.'s and M.E.P.'s for Merseyside and appropriate parts
of Lancashire and Cheshire also be invited to the Special Meeting
and be requested to provide their future support to the campaign;

(M) the Chairman and Chief Executive of Liverpool Football Club be
requested to meet as a matter of urgency with representatives of
the Working Party and the Family Support Group to discuss any
assistance -which the Club may be able to provide to the campaign
for justice; and

(N) following the above meeting the possibility of enlisting the
support of other Football Clubs; particularly Everton F.C., be
considered.
