 Title: LOBBY BRIEFING 11 AM 18/4/89


PRIME MINISTERâ€™S DRY

The Prime Minister bought a "Geranium Badge" from the Greater
London Fund for the Blind in the Front Hall at 10 Downing Street,
at 9.20 this morning (photocall).

At 10.40 am the Prime Minister made the Opening Address at the
London Information Forum at the QEII Centre.

She is departing for Luxembourg immediately after delivering the
opening address and will arrive there about 2.20 pm local time.
The Prime Minister, along with several other European leaders has
been invited to visit Luxembourg for their 150th anniversary
celebrations of the Treaty of London which set up the modern
State of Luxembourg. She will have an Audience of the Grand Duke
at 2.30 pm and will attend a flag raising ceremony before having
bilaterals with Chancellor Vranitsky and Perez de Cuellar. After
the formal celebrations she will have a further bilateral with Mr
Rhyzkov (President of the Council of Ministers). The Prime
Minister will attend a celebratory dinner before returning to
London late tonight.

PRESS NOTICES

None.

PUBLICATIONS

DTp:    Maunsell Report on the Safety of Concrete Bridges.   Press
        Notice at 2.00 pm.

IN THE HOUSE

Statements

Inward Investment (Toyota) (Lord Young/Tony Newton).   (Press
Conference with Lord Young at DTI at 3.45 pm.)

Answers of Interest

No 133 Written at 3.30 pm: Mr Robert G Hughes to ask the
Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster, if he will make a statement
on the future of the National Weights and Measures Laboratory.
(Answer: will announce that the laboratory will become a Next
Steps Agency from today.) Press Notice at 3.30 pm.

No 137 Written at 3.30 pm: Mr Nicholas Bennett to ask the
Secretary of State for Transport whether he proposes to carry out
a review of the traffic area organisation. (Answer: will say
there is to be a review of the function of the Traffic
Commissioners.) Press Notice at 3.30 pm.

No 138 Written at 3.30 pm: Mr Andrew Rowe to ask the Secretary of
State for Transport what conclusions he has reached in the light
of comments received on his paper Motorcycling Safety, issued in
February 1988.  (Answer: will say there is to be a six point plan
for making motorcycling safer.) Press Notice at 3.30 pm.

No 139 Written at 3.30 pm: Mr Patrick McLoughlin to ask the
Secretary of State for Transport, when the sale of British Rail
Engineering Ltd is to be completed.  (Answer: will confirm that
BREL has been sold to a consortium of Trafalgar House and the
management - and contract has been signed today.)

No 140 Written at 3.30 pm: Mr Roger King to ask the Secretary of
State for health whether he has received the second report of the
Committee for Monitoring Agreements on Tobacco Advertising and
Sponsorship; and if he will make a statement. (Answer: will say
voluntary code is working well.) Press Notice at 3.30 pm.

MEETING WITH VLADIMIR PETROVSKY

We said that the Prime Minister had had a brief 15 minute meeting
with Vladimir Petrovsky, Deputy Foreign Minister of the Soviet
Union, on her arrival at the QEII Centre where she was to open the
London Information Forum this morning. Mr Petrovsky conveyed an
oral message from Mr Gorbachev expressing great pleasure at the
success of his recent visit to Britain. Both sides regarded the
visit as part of a continuing process of dialogue between the two
countries. In this spirit Mr Petrovsky conveyed an invitation
from Mr Gorbachev for the Prime Minister to visit the Soviet Union
in 1990. The Prime Minister accepted and they plan to meet in
Kiev in June 1990 during British Week which is to be held there.

We said we had no further details to offer on the programme for
the visit at this stage. Asked whether this meant that the Prime
Minister would be going to the Soviet Union before HM Queen, we
reminded the Lobby that in her interviews following the
Gorbachev's visit the Prime Minister had said she understood that
The Queen was "booked up" for at least 2 years hence.

We said the Prime Minister had last visited the Soviet Union in
March/April 1987.
MONETARY UNION

Asked whether the Prime Minister was likely to raise this during
her visit to Luxembourg today, we said we did not think it would
be an appropriate forum for such discussions.

FOOTBALL SPECTATOR1S BILL

We said the Government remained firm in their intention to proceed
with the Bill. As the Home Secretary had indicated yesterday,
there would be a "seemly pause". This would provide an
opportunity for consultations to see if the Bill needed
strengthening to include provision for all-seater stadia and for
new recommendations which Lord Justice Taylor might wish to submit
in the course of his inquiry into the Hillsborough disaster.

Asked whether any time had been set for a resumption of
Parliamentary consideration of the Bill, we said no. We reminded
the Lobby that while it was the intention of the Government to
complete passage of the Bill this session, it had always been
envisaged that it would be implemented in time for the 1990/91
soccer season. This meant there was time for the Bill to be
finalised.

We reminded the Lobby that the Popp1ewe11 Inquiry had recommended
the introduction of identity cards for football supporters as a
means of combatting hooliganism. What had happened on Saturday
was not the result of obvious hooliganism but was more a matter of
safety at sports grounds.

We said the Prime Minister had expressed no view on the comments
yesterday from Jacques Georges of UEFA, but the Home Secretary has
been critical of his statement. We understood that Mr Georges
had, in any case, gone some way to retract what he had been
reported as saying.

RYAN

Asked for the Government's views on the current situation
viz-a-viz Father Ryan, we said it was a matter for the Attorney
General in Dublin. As far as we were aware it had not been
discussed here recently. The papers had been sent to Ireland
earlier this year at the request of the Irish Attorney General and
it remained a matter for the Irish authorities to decide.
                               4.




KIDNEY BILL

We guided the Lobby that the Bill prohibiting the sale of organs
was likely to come later this week.

SC
 Title: LOBBY BRIEFING 4 PM 18/4/89




We repeated this morning's Lobby.

PRESIDENT MITTERRAND/LEBANON

We said that last evening President Mitterrand had telephoned the
Prime Minister to discuss whether it was feasible for Britain and
France to co-operate in some way in responding to the
deteriorating situation in Lebanon. A number of issues were
discussed. We thought it likely that the Prime Minister might
take the opportunity of her bi-lateral with Peres de Ceullar this
afternoon to discuss the situation in Lebanon.

FOOTBALL

Asked to explain what the Lord President meant when he told Mr
Hattersley that had not repeated the same thing as the Home
Secretary, we said he had expanded on what the Home Secretary had
said yesterday to the extent that he confirmed that the Third
Reading of the Football Spectators' Bill in the House of Lords was
fixed for the 24 April. This had been postponed and no new date
had yet been arranged. That was all.

The Lord President stressed the Bill was an enabling framework.
The Government had already given a full commitment not to
implement the membership scheme within that framework until
arrangements had been worked out satisfactorily. That commitment
still stood and obviously now embraced the lessons to be learned
from the Hillsborough tragedy.

We reiterated that it was still the Government's intention that
the legislation should receive Royal assent in time for the
football membership ID scheme to be fully implemented by the start
of the 1990/91 soccer season. We pointed out that the Bill could
continue into the spillover period and still gain Royal assent
this session.  If it did not, the Bill would be lost and we should
have to start again. But within these time contraints there was
still sufficient flexibility for Lord Justice Taylor to come up
with some interim recommendations if he felt this was appropriate.
The Government had made it clear that in the light of Hillsborough
they would be consulting to see if the Bill needed strengthening
eg by the inclusion of provisions for all-seater stadia.

DELORS REPORT

Asked whether the Prime Minister would have the opportunity during
her visit to Luxembourg to discuss the Delors Report with Mr
Delors, we said we did not know whether he would be present for
                               2.




the celebrations but did not in any case think it was an
appropriate forum for such discussions.

VISIT TO KIEV

We could offer no further guidance on the timing or duration of
next year's visit nor could we say whether the Prime Minister was
likely to visit any other cities in the Soviet Union. We
suggested the Lobby speak to Buckingham Palace about suggestions
that Princess Anne might visit Kiev for the British Fair. We
reminded the Lobby of the Prime Minister's words following Mr
Gorbachev's visit that The Queen's diary for overseas visits was
filled for at least two years.

SC
