 Title: LOBBY BRIEFING 11 AM 24 JANUARY 1990

PRIME MINISTERâ€™S DAY

The Prime Minister will be working at No 10 for much of the day.
At 11.00 she will open the Tate Gallery's new exhibition "Past,
Present and Future", the first complete re-hang of their
collection for nearly thirty years. At 5.00pm she is meeting the
Conservative Members of the European Parliament.

PRESS NOTICES

None

PUBLICATIONS

None

IN THE HOUSE

Statements

None

Answers of Interest

No 200 Written at 3.30 pm: Mr Hugo Summerson to ask the Secretary
of State for Transport what conclusions he has reached about the
possibility of earmarking part of the expenditure accepted for
transport supplementary grant for work that will help reduce the
number of casualties on local authority roads (answer will say
that the Transport Supplementary Grant will be available for local
safety schemes).Press notice   at 3.30 pm.

No 218 Written at  3.30pm: Mr Tom Pendry to ask the Secretary of
State for the Home Department when he received Lord Justice
Taylor's final report into the Hillsborough disaster, and when he
is proposing to publish it (answer will say report was received on
19 January.  It will be published as soon as possible)

No 231 Written at 3.30 pm: Mr Michael Carttiss to ask the
Secretary of State for Health when the consultation document on
independent inspection units promised in the White Paper, Caring
for People, will be published (answer will say consultation
document is to be published). Press notice at 3.30 pm.

No 233 Written at   3.30pm: Mr Matthew Carrington to ask the
Secretary of State for Defence when the British military
contingent of the United Nations Transition Assistance Group
(UNTAG) in Namibia will return to the United Kingdom and if he
will make a statement (answer will give details of the withdrawal
of the UK contingent to UNTAG in Namibia)
No 235 Written at 3.30 pm: Sir John Wheeler to ask the Secretary
of State for the Home Department what further deve1opments there
have been in his plans to help prisoners maintain contact with
their families and friends (answer will announce pilot scheme to
change censorship of prisoners' mail and to allow remand prisoners
to use cardphones). Press notice at 3.30 pm.

OTHER DEPARTMENTAL BUSINESS

DEN John Wakeham addresses RIBA on energy efficiency.    PN at
10.30am

DEN John Wakeham to address the Institute of Mining Engineers
Centenary Dinner. PN this evening at the H of C

LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR'S REPORT

In response to questions we said that the report would be
published as soon as possible, we hoped early next week.  There
were no plans for a statement today but we could not rule out the
possibility of a statement on the same day as the report was
published. We said that we were not prepared to comment on the
substance of the report itself: it was a thick, substantial
report which dealt not only with the proposals for some sort of
football ID scheme, but also with hooliganism, safety at football
grounds, etc.  The report should be looked at as a whole - that is
why it would be published as soon as possible. We confirmed that
ministers involved had met yesterday to look at the whole of the
report.

We confirmed that the Football Spectators Act was an enabling Act
and made provision for an ID scheme to be administered. Our
understanding was that there would be two occasions on which the
recommendations of the report would be discussed, including a
debate on the establishment of any scheme. No scheme could be
introduced until it had been debated and voted on in the House.

MR STALKER

We reminded the Lobby that as the document   Mr Stalker referred to
was in his possession, it was up to him to   give details of what he
proposed to do with it. We said there was    no reason for him to
deliver the document here, we assumed that   it would be passed to
the Home Office.

MEPs

We confirmed that the Foreign Secretary would also attend this
afternoon's meeting with the MEPs.  The Prime Minister met the
MEPs roughly once a year, although she saw their Leader,
Christopher Prout, more often. We imagined that the Prime
Minister would be in a listening mode and that the MEPs would seek
to put over their point of view against the background of what was
happening in Eastern Europe, in which the UK was in the lead. We
thought the meeting would last about an hour.  The timing of the
meeting had, we thought, evolved around the beginning of this year
to fit in with an annual meeting.

Responding to questions we said that the Prime Minister believed
the key democratic control of the EC Commission and other similar
organi sat ions should be with national parliaments. While the
Council of Ministers presided over Commission spending and other
programmes, the Ministers themselves were accountable to their own
national parliaments.

GEC/FERRANTI

We said that we were obviously keen to see British products
entering the world market and anything that secured that objective
was welcome. However the takeover would have to be considered by
the Monopolies and Mergers Commission.  MOD had noted the GEC
proposal and we assumed the Prime Minister had been kept informed,
but there was no sign of a statement from the Government on this
issue nor an idea yet of when a final decision could be expected.
There had been no meeting of ministers about this.

MAD COW DISEASE

We said that we expected there to be a report to Cabinet on this
in the normal course of events. Before any ministerial action
could be considered we assumed officials would continue to try and
resolve this in Brussels. All the veterinarians involved,
including the Germans, were in agreement on this issue - in
support of the British case.

VIETNAMESE BOAT PEOPLE

We said that we were not too keen on the idea of a
delay/moratorium on the question of returning Vietnamese Boat
people.  While it sounded fine in principle we needed to consider
this carefully, after all it would be Hong Kong that was left to
cope with the problem if there were delays.  There were already
considerable problems in Hong Kong in dealing with these people
and the conditions in which they were housed were far from
satisfactory.  We expected to be reviewing the situation later in
the day in light of developments in Geneva. However we would
expect any agreements reached there to be reviewed here before a
final decision was taken.




PB
 Title: LOBBY BRIEFING 4 PM 24 JANUARY 1990

We repeated this morning's Lobby.

PRESS NOTICE

Appointment of Forestry Commissioner.

FOOTBALL

In response to a question we said there had been no further
meetings since yesterday.  Pressed as to whether decisions had
been taken at yesterday's meeting we said we thought the
Government had a pretty fair idea of where they were going. We
guided the Lobby that we understood that the parliamentary answer
today from the Home Secretary was likely to indicate that the
report would be published on Monday and it was reasonable to
suppose the Government would be making its response via a
statement on the same day.

We declined to guide the Lobby or to offer any other comment on
the Government's response to Lord Justice Taylor's report: they
would have to wait and see. The report was a very substantial
document and dealt with a range of issues from hooliganism to
safety.  There was a lot in it for the sports industry itself to
digest.  All along the Government had shown itself concerned about
hooliganism and safety at football matches.  No-one could deny
that the Government had not taken the matter seriously.  Others
would have to do so.

Asked whether there were likely to be any further discussions in
Government before next we ek's statement, we said we thought there
would inevitably be exchanges between the Home Office and the
Department of Environment.   The Home Secretary had the prime
responsibility and it was possible he would report to Cabinet
tomorrow morning on the receipt of the Taylor Report. Asked
whether the Minister of Sport was likely to represent the
Department of the Environment at tomorrow's Cabinet as the
Secretary of State would be abroad, we said we thought it
unlikely.

We reiterated the points made at this morning's Lobby about the
Football Spectators Act: it was an enabling measure which provided
for the creation of a football management authority which in turn
would be given the responsibi1ity of drawing up an ID card scheme.
Both of these steps required a vote in the House. No action had
been taken so far other than the enactment of the primary
legislation. We acknowledged that it was always possible for
legislation to be held on the stocks to be brought forward as
required in the future.
We reminded the Lobby that the legislation contained other
important provisions including those which would prevent convicted
hooligans from travelling abroad to matches by making them subject
to orders to report to local police stations on match days.

Asked whether there were any precedents for Governments failing to
enact measures, we said we could not offer any guidance on
precedents because we were not commenting in any way which could
lead the Lobby to conclude what the Government's response to Lord
Justice Taylor's report was before next week.   We said the
Government had the resolution, the guts and the flexibility to do
what was necessary.

FAY REVIEW BODIES

In response to a question about whether all the reports were now
in, we reminded the Lobby that we had always said that we
anticipated they would all be received by the end of the month and
that an announcement would be made early in February.

MEPs

We stressed this was a Party meeting. We assumed there was likely
to be a line from Central Office after the meeting.




SC
