 Title: LOBBY NOTE 11.00 AM 15/5/89


PRIME MINISTERâ€™S DAY

The Prime Minister is working at No 10 for most of the day.

At 11.00 am she is opening Associated Newspapers' new printing and
distribution plant at Rotherhithe (photocall).

At 4.30 pm she will meet M Jacques Santer, Prime Minister of
Luxembourg. (photocal1).

PRESS NOTICES

None.

PUBLICATIONS

DES: HMI Better Libraries report. Publication at 10.30 with Press
     Notice.

IN THE HOUSE

Statements

None.

Answers of Interest

None.

ARGENTINIAN ELECTIONS

We said that there were no plans to send a message to Mr Menem at
this stage. However we welcomed the continuation of the
democratic process in Argentina. We pointed out that we had
repeatedly made clear that we wanted more normal relations with
Argentina. If the new Government there wanted better relations,
they could show it by, for example, lifting unilateral
restrictions against our commercial, aviation and shipping
interests. In answer to a question, we said that we had not
increased the state of alert in the Falklands. We added that in
any case sovereignty was not up for negotiation. We confirmed
that there were no discussions currently underway with the
Argentinians, and reminded the Lobby that the new President was
not due to take office until December.

EUROPEAN COMMUNITY

We said that the Prime Minister had no message for Mr Heath but
pointed out that she had made her views on Europe known on many
                               2.




occasions. Most recently, she had said in Perth that we were good
Europeans; that we joined the EC in good faith; and that we would
work from within for our kind of Europe.   We also quoted passages
from pages 4 and 5 of the Bruge speech which set out similar
views. Asked if we were not prepared to accept a Europe other
than on our terms, we pointed out that we were always open to
negotiations. We said that there was a better Europe as a result
of the Prime Minister's close interest in it.

ROSE THEATRE

We said that the Prime Minister continued to take a close interest
in the matter. She had no plans to see any Environment Ministers
about it.

JACQUES SANTER

We said that M Santer was passing through.   There were no specific
issues to cover.

FOOTBALL

Asked if the football hooliganism over the weekend would cause
Ministers to bring forward the Football Membership Bill, we
pointed out that we had always said there would be a reasonable
pause. But we were gravely concerned at the latest developments.
It proved the importance of having some legislation. It was a
clear sign of the need for action. Asked when the Second Reading
could be expected, we said that it would be after the Third
Reading in the House of Lords. No date was yet set.

MB
 Title: LOBBY BRIEFING 4 PM 15/5/89


We repeated this morning's Lobby and drew attention to this
afternoon's Department of the Environment PNG on the future of the
Rose Theatre.

EUROPEAN COMMUNITY

We said the Prime Minister's remarks at Associated Newspapers this
morning were not scripted. We repeated that she had no specific
comments on Mr Heath's remarks and we read extracts from the Bruge
speech and her Perth speech last Friday evidencing her commitment
to Europe. We confirmed she would be interviewed by Associated
Newspapers on Wednesday but we did not know the content - that
would be a matter for the journalist and the editor. We said it
was nonsense to suggest that the Prime Minister was unhappy with
the Single European Act because she had missed the snail print.
We said she had no comments on Michael Heseltine's remarks.

FOOTBALL

We said that the Prime Minister had not seen Mr Moynihan today
about crowd safety and that the matter of erecting safety barriers
was for local authorities and the police. We said the formal
inquiry into crowd control and safety had begun today. We
confirmed there was no date for the Commons Second Reading.

TRANSPORT

We said we were not aware that the Employment Green Paper would
contain proposals to limit the effect of unofficial transport
strikes.

GC
