Title: LOBBY BRIEFING 11 AM 25 JANUARY 1990

PRIME MINISTERâ€™S DRY

The Prime Minister will be working for most of the day at No 10.
She chaired a Cabinet meeting at 10.30 (full attendance except for
Peter Brooke, in Washington, and Chris Patten, in Nairobi). At
3.15 pm she will be in the House for Questions.

PRESS NOTICES

None

PUBLICATIONS

None

IN THE HOUSE

Statements

Business Statement

Answers of Interest

No 298 Written at 3.30pm: Mr Michael Brown to ask the Chancellor
of the Exchequer, what progress has been made regarding the
Government's response, Cmnd.9499, to the proposal made in the
Study Group chaired by Sir Hugh Beach, Cmnd.9112, that an
advisory service for the media be established to operate during a
time of tension or war (answer will announce establishment of
Media Advisory Service). Press Notice at 3.30pm.

No 301 Written at 3.30pm:  Sir Hector Munro to ask the Secretary
of State for Scotland, if he will announce the results of
the survey of bathing water quality made in 1989;  and if
he will make a statement (answer will contain better news on the
quality of bathing waters around Scotland). Press Notice with
statistical tables at 3.30pm.

No 304 Written at 3.30pm: Mr Harry Greenway to ask the Secretary
of State for Education and Science, what steps he proposes to take
to deal with concern about key stage 4 of the national curriculum
(answer will be a substantive one setting out our education
priorities in respect of the key stage four of national
curriculum). Press Notice, plus text of speech (by John MacGregor
to the Society of Education Officers this evening) at 3.30pm.
OTHER DEPARTMENTAL BUSINESS

MOD Press Notice at 3.00 pm - will announce relocation of Defence
Quality Assurance Laboratories (they are to move to Teesside over
the period 1993-95).

MEDIA ADVISORY SERVICE

We reminded the Lobby of the background to the establishment of an
MAS, as trailed in Question 298 above, ie a review had been
instigated following the Falklands Islands conflict to look at the
role of the media during times of war or tension.

FOOTBALL

In response to questions we said that the Taylor report
conclusions could well be reported to Cabinet, although it was not
on the agenda.  A decision had been taken on this report, subject
to any Cabinet comments assuming it was discussed this morning.
We added that despite what BBC might say, we were not giving any
guidance on the report. If the Prime Minister were to be asked
during Questions today about the report, we thought she would
simply refer to its publication on Monday. We reminded the Lobby
of the enabling legislation that already existed.  There were a
whole raft of safety measures in the legislation.

JMBULfiNCE WORKERS

We said we had no comment to make on reports that North West
London ambulance workers had gone on all-out strike.

PAY REVIEW BODIES

We said that the various reports were due in by the end of this
month. We expected their publication soon thereafter.   In the
first instance Ministers concerned would initially consider the
report's recommendations before reporting to Cabinet.  There were
five reports from the various review bodies plus the interim
committee report on teachers * pay .
MMC REPORT ON PETROL PRICING

We said   that Government response to the report was not imminent.
DTI did   not give guidance on publication dates for such reports
because   of commercial sensitivities. The report had been received
the day   before Parliament recessed for the Christmas break.
 Title: LEADERS BRIEFING 4.35 PM 25 JANUARY 1990

FOOTBALL

The Leader said that the announcement that there would be a debate
on Tuesday following publication of Lord Justice Taylor's Report
on Monday, was, procedurally, much as would have been expected.
The Leader reminded the Lobby that there remained a real problem
of hooliganism in and around football grounds to which the
Government had taken some action. The Taylor Report needed to be
studied very carefully, it covered a whole range of issues of
which the ID scheme was only one. The possibility of introducing
an ID card was only an option.

The Leader said that he was not sure who would handle the debate
in Parliament on Tuesday. Mr Waddington would make the statement
on Monday, to coincide with the publication of the Report, which
would announce the Government's reaction to the recommendations.
Obviously this was a matter which needed to be debated further and
we would see where we went from there. The Government was making
no apologies for spending a lot of time on this issue given the
seriousness of the problem.

The Leader said that some points from the previously enacted
Enabling Act (e.g. FMA) might be brought forward depending upon
the feeling in the House following the debate next week. The Act
made provision in a general sense covering many other items. In
response to further questioning the Leader told the Lobby to await
Mr Waddington's statement and to study the report when it was
available.

In response to questions the   Leader pointed out that the football
industry had resources which   it utilised for transfer fees. It
was relevant, in the context   of this argument, to look at how much
had been or indeed should be   spent on stadia improvements.

NATIONAL ID CARDS

In response to questions the Leader said that pilot schemes had
been considered last year but as far as he was aware nothing
substantive had followed. He did not know the latest position.

P M 1S MEETING WITH MEPs

In commenting on yesterday's meeting between the Prime Minister
and the Conservative MEPs, the Leader said that it was wrong to
consider MEPs and MPs as two separate groups. There was a growing
cross-fertilisation, and an increased perception of the need for
this between the two sets of MPs. The national and international
parliamentarians had a complimentary role and this had been
recognised not only by the Conservatives but also by the Labour
Party. It was a developing situation with the two groups coming
closer together (he instanced that MEPs would be welcome at the
1922 Committee meetings).

COMPETING CURRENCIES DOCUMENT

The Leader confirmed that the latest text was not the final one.
A great deal of further thought and analysis needed to go into
this before the IGC.




BRIEFING BY DEPUTY PRESS SECRETARY             4.50 PM

We repeated this morning's Lobby.

FOOTBALL

We confirmed that Mr Waddington had reported on this issue to
Cabinet, describing the main findings from the Taylor Report and
the Government's proposals.  There had been no debate following
what Mr Waddington had said or on what the Government proposed to
do (this had been decided at a ministerial meeting on Tuesday
at which, evidently, the Prime Minister's views had been made
known).

We said that the Prime Minister had maintained her normal line
during Questions on this issue as far as all-seating stadia were
concerned. We pointed out that seating improved safety and helped
to control hooliganism.  The Government announced plans last
summer for grounds to go to all-seating in the first and second
divisions where there was sufficient money for this to be
introduced.  We conceded that in the lower divisions there might
be financial problems. But the Government had recognised this:
there was a wide variety of programmes in hand with some grounds
already had all-seating while others were going along that road.
For guidance on the timing attached to this the Lobby should speak
to DOE.

We reminded the Lobby that they should wait for Mr Waddington's
statement on Monday and the publication of the Report to
appreciate the full range of recommendations Lord Justice Taylor
had made.  They covered all aspects of the football world.  That
was why the Prime Minister had urged careful reading of the
Report.

We confirmed that the question of licensing grounds was tied into
the question of providing seating. More generally we said that
under the legislation the setting up of an FMA and the possible
introduction of an ID scheme had to be debated.  The FMA would
have no authority for licensing but would deal with ID cards only.
No ID cards would mean no FMA.


PB
