 Title: LOBBY BRIEFING 4 PM 2/5/89




We repeated this morning's Lobby.

EC

Asked about the Prime Minister's remarks at Question Time about
Parliamentary scrutiny of EC legislation, we said that she had
often expressed concern that the Commission might be tempted to
extend its areas of competence. The problem was that
Parliamentary scrutiny committees examined European legislation
only when it had been through the whole process in Europe. That
was rather too late.

Governments since 1973 had been concerned to limit the authority
of the Commission over various areas of policy. In particular the
Prime Minister had said that we must not allow the movement
towards the Single Market to be used as a means of extending the
competence of the Commission beyond what was strictly necessary.
Harmonisation of currencies and various environmental measures,
for instance, should not be brought about as a by-product of
Single Market Directives.

Asked whether British junior Ministers were letting unhelpful
measures through during lengthy negotiating sessions at Councils
of Ministers, we said we were not aware of it. The Government had
always been vigilant in these discussions, but the Prime
Minister's remarks did reflect the depth of her concern. There
would be new vigilance to match that concern.

EMS

We said that we remained convinced that we should only enter the
EMS when the time was right. Nothing suggested that the Prime
Minister's mind had changed, whatever other gossip might be put
about.

GRANDCHILD

We said that Mr Mark Thatcher had been into No 10, but that it was
not known when the Prime Minister would see her grandchild.

10TH ANNIVERSARY

We said there might be something for the press in Downing Street
on Thursday morning. More formally, we understood that there
would be a lunch given by the 1922 Committee on Wednesday and a
Cabinet dinner on Thursday.
                               2.




HEALTH SERVICE

Asked whether concessions were likely on GPs contracts, we said
that none were in prospect. We urged the Lobby not to confuse GPs
contracts and the wider question of the NHS review. On contracts
we said there would be negotiation on details, but not on
principle.

FOOTBALL

We said that football clubs could hardly plead poverty when asked
to institute a membership card system. Some Â£70m was spent on
transfer fees each year.

SIR ALAN WALTERS

We said that the Prime Minister had met Sir Alan Walters. His
consultancy would take up some 50% of his time. We would be
surprised if he did not offer some comment on the Delors plan, but
he had no specific projects and was being employed as a general
adviser who would give his views on a wide range of economic
matters.

PA
