                      INTER AGENCY MEETING

                    FRIDAY, 28TH APRIL, 1989

P r e s e n t :-

Mr. W. Twist, (in the Chair), Social Services, Lancashire
Mr. V. Citarella, Deputy Director of Social Services,
   Liverpool.
Ms. C. Wilkinson, Assistant Director of Social Services,
   Liverpool.
Mr. P. Marley, Assistant Director of Social Services,
   Liverpool.
Mr. E. Cooper, Merseyside Probation Service.
Mr. J. Townsend, Social Services, Cheshire.
Mr. A. Guthrie, Personal Services, St. Helens.
Mr. B. Walker, Social Services, Knowsley.
Mr. J. Peet, Social Services, Sefton.
Mr. D. Evans, Social Services, Wirral.
Mrs. S. Roberts, Social Services, Wirral.
Mr. R. Tann, Merseyside F. and C.B.A., Emergency Planning
M r s . in Newby, social S e r v i c e s , L a n c a s h i r e .
Mr. D. Whitham, Social Services, Nottinghamshire.
Mr. J. Pilling, Social Services, Sheffield.
Mr. D. Perks, Social Services, Sheffield.
Mr. G. Davey, City Solicitor's, Liverpool.
Mr. A. Horner, City Solicitor's, Liverpool.




GAQAAG
                                - I -
                                                                       ACTION

111 , Meeting with Sheffield/Nottinghamshire S.S.D.s

      Wilf Twist referred to the meeting of this Group with
      representatives of Sheffield and Nottinghamshire Social
      Services Departments at 3.00 p.m.       today at which there
      h a d been an informal exchange of views.     It was
      becoming increasingly clear that bot h Authorities,
      part ic ul a rl y Sheffield, have a permanent pro bl em and it
      was reported that representatives of those Authorities
      h ad been informed that they are welcome to attend
      future meetings of this Group.

112   Leaflets/Badges

           Those Authorities yet to arrange pick-up of                 All to
      available publicity material from Hatton Garden are              note
      requested to do so.

113   V o l u nt ar y Sector Training Day

             It was noted that the venue for the voluntary             Pauline
      sector training day on 24tn May had been fixed                   •
                                                                       f arrell
      p r ovisionally for Bootle Town Hall.

114   Volu nt ar y Sector Co-ordinating Committee

           It was agreed that clarification be sought for the          Pauline
      next meeting of this Group about whether meetings of             Farrell
      the Volun t ar y Sector Co-ordinating Committee are
      continuing on a weekly basis.

115   Helpline

           Carole Wilkinson circulated a new rota for the
      staffing of the Helpline to reflect the number of calls
      received at differing times of the day.  Assistance was
      sought from Authorities in the nomination of persons
      willing to act a s :-

      (a)   collators (to check referrals, deal with gaps and
            confusions, take decisions, etc.);  and

      (b)   co-ordinators (to lead the shift, brief staff,
            deal with team queries and liaise with senior
            m a n a g e m e n t ).

               It was agreed that each Authority nominate one          All to
      p e rs o n to attend a meeting with the current                  note
      co-ordinators at 11.30 a.m. on 3rd May in the Helpline,
      Johnson Street, to discuss this issue further.




      GAQAAG
                                      - 2 -

                                                                   ACTION

  116 1 Computers

              A note prepared by Ken Johnson on computer
        c ompatibility between agencies was circulated.  It was
        agreed that further consideration may be needed on this
        issue following a decision on the recommendations of.
        Professor Howard Parker's Planning Group.

  117   Core Document - Staff

             A draft core document for the use of all              All to
        Authorities and agencies (under cover of it's own          note
        letter) was circulated and agreed as a basis for
        advising staff of the progress that has be e n made to
        establish services in the wake of the Hillsborough
        tragedy.  Essentially the document is similar to the
        core document for Members (agreed at this meeting on
        26th April) with additional information relating to the
        establishment of the BASW Staffline.

^^118   Appeal Fund

        (a)   Social Security implications

              A copy of a letter of 27th April, from the           Derek
              Minister of State for Social Security to Tony        Evans
              Banks, M.P., about the effect of payments from the
              Fund on D.S.S. benefits was circulated.   In view
              of the present uncertainties that still exist
              regarding this matter, the offer of Derek Evans to
              convene a meeting of Senior Benefit Advisers of
              the core authorities and Sheffield MBC to
              investigate this further, was accepted.   Any
              questions that still require clarification
              following the meeting of Benefit Advisers should
              be conveyed to Paddy Marley for transmission to
              the National Association of CABs, who will arrange
              to meet with the D.S.S.  in an endeavour to
              determine the issue.  This meeting will be kept

•       (b)
              informed of progress.

              Payments

              A letter of 27th April, from the Trust Fund
              Manager to David Mason about the intentions of the
              Trust so far as an early payment to bereaved
              families and relatives of those seriously injured,
              was circulated.   The Group noted that this
              intention would be dependent upon the availability
              of information p resently being compiled by
              Liverpool S.S.D. regarding the casualty lists and
              details of next of kin, work on which is
              cont inui ng .



        GAQAAG
                                     - 3 -

                                                                  A C TI O N

      (c)   Expenses

            Authorities are asked to provide details to the       All to
            Trust Fund Manager (in the manner discussed at        note
            this meeting on 24th April) of monies expended to
            date in connection with the tragedy.

      (d)   Claims received b y the Trust

            Paddy Marley reported that he had been sent by the    Paddy
            Trust Fund Manager 39 letters of claim against the    Marley
            Fund which h a d been received by the Fund Manager
            in one day's mail.    Following a full and detailed
            discussion about the use the information could be
            put to, and bearing in mind the previous
            discussions at this Group emphasising that the
            Local Authorities would have no direct
            responsibility or involvement in relation to the
            Fund and it's management, it was agreed that the
            letters so far received from the Fund Manager be
            returned and that he be requested to agree to
            insert a leaflet in his acknowledgement of each
            claim inviting the claimant to opt-in to the
            service offered through the Helpline.    In this
            connection, Paddy Marley was requested to prepare
            an appropriate leaflet (possibly containing a
            tear-off name and address return slip) and pass
            copies to the Fund Manager.

119   Reimbursements to Staff

           A detailed recommendation arising from the meeting     All to
      of administrative officers from the core authorities        note
      held on 27th April, relating to reimbursements to all
      staff affected by the Hillsborough tragedy, in
      recognition of additional time and commitment given,
      was circulated.  The recommendation covers two periods,
      16th to 30th April, and 1st May onwards.   It was agreed
      that the recommendation be approved so far as this
      Group is concerned and Authorities are requested to
      consult where necessary and report back urgently to
      Paddy Marley on 2nd May, if any problems have arisen.
      The meeting requested that copies of the recommendation     Paddy
      be forwarded to Sheffield MBC, Nottingham City Council      Marley
      and Nottinghamshire County Council, in order that those
      Authorities may be aware of how the issue of
      reimbursements to staff is being dealt with in the core
      authorities.




      GAQAAG
                                    - 4 -

                                                                 ACTION

120   Letter from Trent H.A.

           A copy of the response of 27th April to the
      communication from the Trent Regional Health Authority
      about de-briefing sessions was circulated and noted.

121   Training

             It was agreed that Sue Roberts (Wirral) would
      raise, at a meeting of the North West Principal
      Training Officers to be held on 3rd May, the question
      o f :-

      (a)   arranging training sessions with Michael Stewart
            for Training Officersr  and

      (b)   the appointment of a representative to sit on the
            recruitment panel for the posts currently
            advertised in Social Work Today for Training
            Officers - Crisis Psychology, and to report the
            outcome back to this meeting.

           It was also agreed that any training sessions for
      Training Officers from the core Authorities should
      include appropriate representatives from Sheffield and
      Nottingham.

122   Offers of Help

           Vic Citarella circulated a note on issues which
      need to be addressed in relation to the volume of
      offers of help which have been received since the
      tragedy.  In view of the scale of the task facing this
      Group and the various options for dealing with the
      offers, it was agreed that:-

      (a)   the whole issue of h o w to proceed be referred to   Pauline
            the meeting of Community Liaison Officers being      Farrell
            organised by Pauline Farrell and they be requested
            to make appropriate recommendations back to this
            Group;

      (b)   the issue of the administrative task in sifting
            through offers of help, be raised at the meeting
            as an immediate priority and the equivalent
            officers to those presently undertaking the task
            in Liverpool (SWLO/VWO posts) be freed up from
            each of the core Authorities (and the Mersey
            Regional Health Authority) to assist in this work
            and to gain early knowledge of the offers of
            assistance received, which could be appropriate
            and matched to the circumstances and requirements
            of families within their own Authorities; and



      GAQAAG
                                     - 5 -

                                                                   ACTION

      (c)   a print-out of specific offers of h e l p from large   Paddy
            organisations be undertaken forthwith and              Marley
            details be passed to the Group now established,
            for urgent consideration.

123   Police Hotline

           Paddy Marley reported that callers to the Police        Paddy
      Hotline are being advised of the telephone number of         Marley
      Helpline and that rules governing the compilation of
      evidence from juveniles are being adhered to.  It was
      agreed that an appropriate letter about the Helpline be
      devised for transmission to all those being interviewed
      by the police in follow-up visits to their homes.   It
      was noted that the Police had contacted Chief
      Executives of the Merseyside Authorities seeking office
      accommodation for interviewing purposes and it was
      agreed that the Police be requested to also seek to
      establish interview facilities in Cheshire and
      Lancashire by reference also to the Chief Executives of
      those Authorities.

124   Visit of HRH Prince of Wales

              The meeting noted the p ro posed itinerary for the   Paddy
      Royal visit on 3rd May and requested that an approach        Marley
      be made to the Lord Lieutenant's office expressing
      surprise and disappointment that the media reports that
      the Prince would meet Social Workers directly involved
      in the tragedy appear, from the itinerary, to be
      i n co r re ct .

125   BBC North West - Children in Need Appeal

           A letter of 21st April, from the Children in Need       David
      Appeal Co-ordinator (North West) to Liverpool S.S.D.         Mason
      about the availability of appeal funds for 'those
      living in poverty or in situations of deprivation; and
      those suffering through distress, abuse or neglect' was
      circulated.  No reference was made in the letter to the
      Hillsborough tragedy.  It was agreed that David Mason
      should approach the Children in Need Appeal
      Co-ordinator to express the view of this meeting that
      the Appeal should target funds to issues that will
      benefit children and families who have been put under
      distress by the Hillsborough incident.

126   Date of Next Meeting

           It was agreed that further meetings of this Group       All to
      be held at 4.00 p.m. on 2nd May, and provisionally,          note
      4.00 p.m. on 5th May.




      GAQAAG
