      THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER APPEAL
             THE TRUSTEES OF THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER APPEAL
                                    P.O. BOX 220,    LIVERPOOL L69 2PN.
                                           Telephone: 051-236 0044
                                              Fax:051-236 0090

T h e Ti-ust F u n d M an ag er,
M r. C. M. R e d d in g to n .




The Editor,
Liverpool Law Society Bulletin
Liverpool Law Society,
Castle Street,
Liverpool, 2,



                                                                                  14th June 1989



Dear Sir,

                              Hillsborough Disaster Appeal (â€œthe Ap p e a l 11)

    The Appeal was established immediately after the Hillsborough Disaster to
raise funds for the benefit of the bereaved and injured and for community
needs in ways which commemorate the disaster and reflect the generosity of
subscribers to the Appeal.

    At the same time it was realised that there could be a considerable amount
of moneys which could be paid only for charitable purposes so a parallel
charitable fund was established at the same time*  Although the Appeal is
discretionary and the charitable fund can only be expended for charitable
purposes the trustees will, in fact, run the two trust funds in harness,
making payments out of the charitable fund where these can be justified.

    At their first meeting the trustees adopted as one of their principles
that the distribution policy would reflect the fact that hardships had not
been suffered equally and it is therefore necessary for the trustees to
consider the varying circumstances of all those who have been bereaved and all
those who claim to have suffered injuries.  The trustees hope to appoint
medical assessors to consider the claims of those who have been injured in the
near future.  However, for those who have been bereaved the trustees can start
the assembling of evidence straight away.  For this purpose the trustees are
preparing a questionnaire and where solicitors are already instructed the
questionnaire can be sent to them rather than to their clients if the trustees
are so informed.




     TRUSTEES: DEREK H. MORRIS, MICHAEL D. BLANKST0NE, MICHAEL H. F. HAMMOND, W. NORMAN ADSETTS
    A step which can be taken immediately is for the next of kin to obtain
letters of administration in those cases where the person killed has not left
a Will.  In cases where a Will does exist then probate should be obtained as
soon as possible.  The Steering Committee of solicitors have indicated that a
streamlined procedure has been set up for dealing with cases in the District
Probate Registry at Liverpool.   I would like to urge all solicitors to obtain
probate or letters of administration as soon as possible and to send the
details to me without further request.

    The first positive action of the trustees has been to sanction an initial
payment to the bereaved and to certain of those who were in hospital.   These
payments have now been made.  The second stage will be to consider more
substantial payments to those who have been bereaved and injured and we
anticipate that this further distribution will be made well before Christmas.
However, there may be cases of severe financial hardship for those bereaved
and the trustees will entertain applications for assistance either directly or
through solicitors or social workers.

    In cases where there are dependent children and dependent widows it may be
appropriate for a trust fund to be established, particularly where the likely
recipients have not been used to handling any substantial sums of money.   The
trustees would welcome information from solicitors concerned where they think
it would be appropriate for a trust fund to be set up either for children
alone or for the children and their surviving parent.




                               C.M. Reddington
                             Trust Fund Manager
