            '   I




                                                      3rd February 1992
                      1                           :
Dear Sir,             j    - ------   Â«mwpiw m.
                                                  j

       With reference to your rejection of any criminal charges
in relation to the Hillsborough Disaster, we would like to draw
your attention to the following points.

We are now in receipt of letters from the Police Complaints
Authority and Richard Wells Chief Constable of South Yorkshire
Police,which outline the reasons for the rejection.

The basic reason for the rejection of criminal charges is similar
to the reason given by yourself,namely the lack of evidence of
criminal liability.

While we do not agree with your assessment,it is hardly
surprising that you arrived at that decision,in view of the fact
that the enquiries were carried out without any evidence of a
criminal nature being allowed to be put before the inquests.

We as one of the 95 bereaved families would have liked to have
called a lot of lay people who were there on the day,who would
have given damming evidence,but realized that because of the
inquest system the coroner would have rejected their testomony.

With this in mind,we attempted to call 6 senior professional
people,who were there on the day,all were rejected so no
witnesses were called on our behalf.

The South Yorkshire Police,and the coroner had knowledge and
access to all witnesses statements,which they could select the
ones that suited their case best,and would have advance knowledge
of the contents of those statements. The families had no access
to any statements prior to the inquests.

The Police also had control of all video evidence some of which
disappeared without adequate explanation.

The audio tapes which would have provided valuable information of
telephone and radio communication from the Police Control box
were never released for the inquests.

These are just some examples,which show the way in which the
official version of events were diluted to allow you as Home
Secretary to arrive at the decision you made.

As a family,we find it deplorable that the 3 pillars of Law and
Order who should be insuring that the law is applied fairly to
all members of the public,allowing the law to be misused,to cover
up their own basic weaknesses.

In memory of our son Richard,we shall not be put off by all the
abnormalities stated above,but shall go on until the true facts
of the Hillsborough Disaster are allowed to emerge.


                       Yours Respectfully




cc
John Major

Richard Wells

Brigadier Pownall

Editor Daily Mirror

Editor Times

Editor Telegraph
