               SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ADVISORY GROUP

         Meeting in the Town Hall Sheffield, Committee Room 1
              Wednesday 11th October, 1989 at 2.00 p.m.

Attendance:                   )_ Administration and
                            .d) Legal Department
                             - Health & Consumer Services
                            nspector - South Yorkshire Police
                              Donnelly - West Bar
                            .ire Police
                            outh Yorkshire Police
                              Roy Waring -
                            ire Police
                            ) _ South Yorkshire County
                            )    Fire Service
                            ation Officer SYMAS

              It should be noted that there was no one
              representing the Building Surveyors.

MINUTES OF MEETING OF 28TH SEPTEMBER. 1989

Julian Ward commented that both he and Frances Woodhead had received
a number of queries from Departments wanting to know how far their
authority extended. He said that obviously officers who were
visiting the various sports grounds would have to answer comments to
the best of their professional ability but the Clubs must not be
under the impression that those comments amounted to agreement.
Whenever comment was passed, a caveat should be added saying that
the matter was subject to final confirmation by the Council.

Ken Hodgson then raised a particular problem he had had when he
carried out a food hygiene inspection of a temporary structure at
Sheffield United. He enquired to what extent could professional
comment be made without reference to members of the Advisory Group.
Julian Ward conceded that there would be urgent situations.

Ken Hodgson then enquired whether there was a need for a Section 8
notification to be submitted in respect of the proposed temporary
structure. He said that he was aware that the Club wished to instal
ovens. Frances Woodhead commented that a formal Section 8
application should be made.

It was agreed that Ken Hodgson would telephone Sheffield United and
advise them about this and Frances Woodhead would write to them
asking for a formal written application to be referred to the
Advisory Group and ultimately to the General Purposes Panel.

Concerning the item on the minutes of the last meeting about the Don
Valley project, Ron Grimshaw confirmed that meetings with the
developers had taken place and that their representative was aware
of the needs of the Advisory Group.

Frances Woodhead advised about the plans and the fact that a meeting
would probably be scheduled in the near future to discuss the
proposals.
ANNUAL INSPECTION - OUTSTANDING MATTERS

            asked whether there were any additional comments to be
made apart from those contained in the reports attached. The Fire
Service confirmed that in respect of the Bramall Lane Stand, they
had put in a request for suspended exit signs to be installed. This
had not been done. This was particularly important in view of the
fact that the Stand was used by visiting spectators. It was also
commented that the Stand should be stewarded. The required exit sign
was available but this was no good if the exit was not actually
available. The Police confirmed that this would be available from
now on.

The Health and Consumer Services confirmed that they had not carried
out an inspection since the one referred to in the minutes of the
meeting.

            suggested that the Club was given three weeks to carry
out outstanding works and if they were not completed, then the
matter should be referred to General Purposes Panel. There was also
reference to Arthur Butlers report upon the condition of the
terracing and the fact that this may not be able to be completed
within the three week period. We need to check if the Club have had
their letter of the 27th September from the Fire Service. It was
agreed that the Club would be written to.

OUTSTANDING ITEMS FROM MINUTES OF ADVISORY GROUP MEETING TO DATE

                 identified a number of matters. It was decided
that the following matters will be deferred, the outstanding items
on the Sheffield Wednesday Safety Certificate, the application of
the Green Guide, the car park at Sheffield Wednesday and a date for
the meeting to discuss the proposals for Don Valley. That left the
Sheffield United Football Club Safety Certificate, particularly the
item concerning capacity the disabled facilities and the family
enclosure.

The Fire Service had comments to make upon the capacity at the Kop
in line with their recent letter.               Isaid that there were
no worries about capacity apart from the Kop except the monitoring
of stairways out of the John Street Stand. His main concern was the
Kop because there were only sufficient exits for 11,040 people.
That took account of the exit from Shoreham Street. There is there
a seven unit gate which reduces to six units but it has been
accepted as a seven unit gate because of its length. The final
exits are alright. The problem is the configuration of the
stairways from the Stand to the Shoreham Street corner. There are
twelve units but 18 are needed. Eastwoods have checked the matter
and accept that there is a bottle neck on the stairway. In an area
between two landings, there are only four units available and the
area funnels. The area could be widened but it would not be worth
it because it would not increase the capacity sufficiently to
justify it.

The police commented that they were concerned that at matches with
large capacities, there may be a problem outside the ground when
their only spare capacity was in the John Street Terrace. They felt
that pressure should be put on the Clubs to take steps to ensure
that the Kop could be increased. They said that last year, the
capacity was accepted as 18,000.
      The Fire Authority commented that they did know where the 18,000        ACTION
      capacity had come from. They accepted that the use of pitch
      perimeter gates increased the capacity by 4,000 and that the Fire
      Authority wrote Eastwoods in 1986 but their comment was subject to
      referal to the Advisory Group even though it did specify an
      increased capacity.

      The Police said that a reduction in the capacity would present
      difficulties in their contingency plans vis-a-vis segregation.

      ____________ said that it would therefore be appropriate to put
       indirect pressure on the Club to improve the Kop so that additional
       capacity could be accommodated.

      The Fire Authority discounted the use of pitch perimeter gates as
      exits in an emergency.

      It was therefore concluded that at General Purposes Panel on Friday
      13th October, it should be recommended that a reduction in capacity
      on the Kop was made to 11,040. The Fire Authority agreed that they
      would attend the meeting.

4.    DISABLED FACILITIES AND FAMILY ENCLOSURE - SHEFFIELD UNITED FOOTBALL
      CLUB

      It was agreed that with respect to the family enclosure, we were       HALD
      still awaiting details of the kitchen facilities.

5.    EMERGENCY PROCEDURES

      The Police said they were happy with the fire alarm system but that
      there were still some proposals with Eastwoods.

6.    PUBLIC ADDRESS SYSTEM AND FIRE WARNING SYSTEM
      It was confirmed that the Club had written and confirmed that it met
      the necessary requirements.

7.    LOCKED NON-RETURN TURNSTILE

      The Police indicated that            was aware of this problem and
      the matter was being dealt with.

8 & 9 THE INTERIM RECOMMENDATIONS AND THE ADVISORY GROUP ROLE. ETC.

      It was agreed that it was better to defer these items due to the
      absence of the Senior Police Officer and the Building Surveyor.

10.   OWLERTON SPORTS STADIUM

                   refered to his memo of the 10th October and confirmed
      that work was in progress at the Stadium. The renovation of the
      electrical system had been undertaken. He said that some matters
      were still outstanding from their report and referred to his memo of
      the 10th October.

      The Fire Authority confirmed that the exit signs had been added this
      morning. Ken Hodgson confirmed that Mr. Littlewood wanted some
      advice about the use of panic facilities on gates.
       The Fire Authority said that it was difficult to fit panic bars but    ACTION
       they were in some embarassment since ]             had suggested
       these. They were checking with other authorities re their standards
       and type of gate. They said that a pool bolt was satisfactory
       provided the method of operation was clear. A padlock was also okay
       if it was available and stewarded. They said that they need to give
       further consideration to the type of system to be used.

                   mentioned the first aid requirements. He was concerned
       that the Club had had sight of their draft proposals which were not
       for circulation at this stage.

       The meeting generally agreed that the Club be allowed to open on a
       restricted basis using only the main area in front of the panorama
       suite. The panorama room itself was not to be used and the opening
       was only to be as and when the necessary works were completed, for
       greyhound racing only in the daytime.

       The Fire Authority confirmed that they were satisfied the capacity
       as proposed was alright on the basis as means of escape. They would
       also look at the steps and concreting.                   noted that
       when she visited the stadium with               on the 6th October,
       there was an apparent trip hazard as one entered the main area. Mr.
             ]had not felt able to comment upon this issue,

11 .   ANY OTHER BUSINESS

       Mention was made of the boundary wall at Sheffield Wednesday           HALD
       Football Club. It was decided to defer this matter and there was a
       need to write to Eastwoods seeking their exact proposals as set out
       in basic form in their letter of the 27th September.

       Superintendent Sleath expressed concern about the absence of the       HALD
       Building Surveyor.

                   confirmed that he had received a complaint about alleged
       noise in the North Stand of Sheffield Wednesday. They had written a
       letter in response indicating there was a need to balance public
       interest against public safety. He raised the matter for
       information purposes only.




       SSGAAB/MA
                        SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ADVISORY GROUP
                                                                          ACTION
      Meeting held in the Town Hall, Sheffield, Committee Room No. 1
                 on Thursday, 19th October, 1989, at 10.00 a.m«


Attendance:                    (HCS)
              Messrs.                                      (SYP)
              Messrs.                          (CFS)
              Mr.             (SYMAS)
              Messrss                      (Building Surveyors)
              Messrs.                   (HALD)


At the start of the meeting          indicated that he had a few
minutes before received a telephone message from              of
Sheffield Wednesday (which was not precise in its terms) indicating
that he would be prepared to attend the meeting this morning if the
Police proposals affecting the ingress of Sheffield Wednesday fans to
certain matches were to be discussed. Neither ti
knew anything about these proposals and Mr.           and Mr.
said that there was a letter on its way about the relaxation of
certain Police practices relating to the ingress of Sheffield
Wednesday fans with effect from the football match on 28th October.
After some discussion it was thought that this letter perhaps had not
yet reached the Council. The letter may have been dated 11th October
It was clear that when the letter had been received it would have to
be circulated and discussed at a later meeting.

1.   NOTES OF THE MEETING HELD ON 11TH OCTOBER

     It was noted that these were not yet available but were in the       HALD
     course of preparation at the moment and will be circulated as
     soon as possible.           went on to summarise what had
     happened at the General Purposes Panel Meeting on 13th October.
                 confirmed with Mr[    d that the fixing of the
     capacity of 1,500 or so at Owlerton will be left to the Building
     Surveyor and the Fire Service confirmed that this sort of figure
     was adequate for means of escape purposes, Mr.         further
     confirmed with          that the Panel had approved the Owlerton
     proposals in principle only and that he was unaware of the
     discussions which had taken place at the Panel Meeting, indicated
     that he would shortly be sending a memorandum detailing the works
     required at Owlerton and that he had met Mrs. Woodhead on site at
     Owlerton.

2.   (a) Sheffield United - Disabled Facilities

     There was a brief discussion about these facilities with             BS & FS
     Mr           saying that there was a stepping arrangement that
     they needed to discuss with the Building Surveyor, Mr.
     indicated that unfortunately owing to annual leave, etc. there
     had not been time to arrange this meeting. Both the Building
     Surveor and the Fire Service agreed to have a joint discussion on
     this issue as soon as possible.

     (b) Sheffield United - The Family Enclosure

     All present agreed that their comments could be passed on to the     HALD
     Club and Mr. Butler mentioned that of course some matters had been
                                                                          ACTION

     discussed at a previous Advisory Group which should be included
     in those comments. Both the Fire Service and the Health and
     Consumer Services Department wished to see full details of the       HALD
     catering facilities mentioned in the proposals.

     THE INTERIM RECOMMENDATIONS OF LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR

     This item was deferred.

4.   TERMS OF REFERENCE OF THE ADVISORY GROUP, ETC.

     This item was deferred.

5.   SHEFFIELD UNITED - PAVEMENT REPAIRS

     It was agreed that this item did not need to come back to the
     Advisory Group after officers' comments had been made.

6.   SHEFFIELD UNITED - LPG STORAGE COMPOUND

     When comments were received from Officers this item will be          HALD
     resubmitted in view of its importance. Mr.          mentioned that
     it was proposed to send to Eastwoods a lettei. asKxng for some
     information about the proposed ramp regrading which was shown on
     the plans in addition to the LPG storage facility proposals.

7.   SHEFFIELD UNITED - JOHN STREET STAND - ADDITIONAL GUARD RAILS

     The Fire Service indicated they had no objections to this            B.S.
     proposal. Mr.         made a number of comments about the
     proposal which he said would be confirmed in writing shortly.

8.   SHEFFIELD UNITED - SPION KOP BARRIERS

     Mr.        introduced this item by saying that Mr.
     Eastwood & Partners had telephoned some days ago asKing n there
     had been any indication from the enquiry about heights or types
     of barriers to be used. Obviously this is of interest because
     there would be little point in carrying out extensive works now
     if further works would be required later when the final report
     was available.

     Mr.          briefly outlined the history of circular section
     barriers and indicated that Dr.           had for a long time held
     the opinion that circular section barriers are the most
     appropriate. The Green Guide does however recommend rectangular
     section barriers but this whole area needs investigation. There
     was a need for guidance and it might be appropriate to slow down
     some of the proposals which were coming from the Clubs. There
     were however some barriers that needed repair owing to corrosion.
     Mr.        Hlndicated that in some cases a complete rethink would
     be necessary and advice was needed. There would be difficulty if
     the green guide were to be strictly applied. M r .      tr went on
     to explain that he had in mind situations like this when he would
     not agree to the idea of strictly applying the Green Guide.
              ]Lndicated that as far as the Green Guide was concerned
     it should be strictly applied unless it could be proved that
     something could be made safer than the Green Guide requirement.
     There was an implication that a relaxation of the Green Guide
                                                                           ACTION

      would result in a lowering of safety standards and not an
      increase in them.

      Chief Superintendent Broomhead mentioned paragraph 111 of the
      Green Guide which gives an option in relation to barriers. He
      asked if the engineers were aware of the research referred to in
      that paragraph and M r .       indicated that               was
      involved in the original research which was old. Mr.[
      asked what the research was and Mr. Sheriff reiterated his           HALD
      previous points. Mr.         indicated that perhaps it would be
      appropriate to ask the Inquiry team how far it had got in looking
      at the question of heights and types and designs of barriers and
      if it could assist in any way with the Council's current problem.
      It might also be appropriate to ask the Home Office for details
      of the research referred to in paragraph 111. Mr.          went on
      to point out to the Building Surveyor that where barriers
      required urgent replacement these should be identified
      immediately and works requested of the Clubs. Mr.         1
      indicated that this would be done as soon as possible.               B.S.

      At a slightly later juncture in the meeting Chief Superintendent
      Broomhead referred to paragraph 110 which apparently gave clear
      guidance about the height of barriers. Mr.        ]and
      Mr.         referred to various matters raised in the Inquiry
      about tne neights of the barriers which rendered that particular
      paragraph unclear.

9.    SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY - NORTH STAND HOSPITALITY SUITE

      Everyone was reasonably happy with these proposals but both the
      Fire Service and the Health and Consumer Services Department
      mentioned the question of ventilation. Mr.        1 said he would    HCS
      talk to Eastwoods to sort out the ventilation question and
      discuss the issue with the Fire Service. Mr.           indicated
      that the less holes in the wall of the Hospitality Suite the
      better.

10.   SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY - THE YOUNG OWLS CLUB

      Mr.        reiterated at length his reasons for concern about the    B.S.
      possible accessibility of the roof area by spectators. There was
      therefore a need to prevent such unauthorised spectator access.
      Mr. Butler indicated that the steps should be gated and fenced.
      There should not simply be a "no exit'.' sign; it would not be
      sufficient. The Fire Service asked if this area was policed and
      Chief Inspector Beal indicated that there was no static police
      presence or steward as far as he knew. The Fire Service
      indicated that any sign should say something like "no
      thoroughfare" as the "no exit’, sign was not appropriate.

11.   SHEFFIELD   WEDNESDAY - SPION KOP BARRIERS

      This item was deferred (see Item 8).

12.   SHEFFIELD   WEDNESDAY - SPION KOP - TUNNEL EXIT V

      There were no objections to his   proposal and the recommendation    HALD
      is that it should be approved.
                                                                          ACTION

13.   MISCELLANEOUS POINTS

      Mr. G        indicated that there would be a letter coming to the   F.S.
      Council shortly on the South Stand at Sheffield Wednesday and he
      very briefly summarised the contents of it.

      Mr.        referred to the letters from the South Yorkshire
      Police referring to Professor        and the alleged corrosion on
      crush barriers at Sheffield Wednesday. Mr.        summarised the
      letter and Mr.        H said that they would ring Professor         B.S.
      to find out what was going on if at all possible.

      Station Officer 1         asked about the means of escape at
      Owlerton and fitting of panic bars on gates and if this was
      necessary if the gates were unlocked and stewarded. In the Fire
      Service view this was sufficient. He did however note that the
      Building Surveyor had indicated that panic bolt arrangements
      should be used. Mr.         indicated that he was very concerned
      about the management at the Stadium and that he had a photograph
      of an exit door which was apparently available but was in fact
      secured by bolts, nails and barbed wire. If the management
      continue to adopt this sort of practice then it it unlikely they
      will stick to agreed procedures about stewarding, etc. Mr.
      then commented on the opening of Owlerton or a part of it by
      saying that this could be achieved either by serving an amended
      prohibition notice or issuing a General Safety Certificate and
      this issue was being considered at the moment. The Fire Service
      indicated that there were a number of conditions they wished to
      see imposed on Owlerton covering such matters as stewarding, etc.
      Mr.        suggested that he, the Fire Service and the
      Administration and Legal Department should attend at Owlerton and   HALD
      have a meeting with the Club to make sure that there were no
      misunderstandings.

      There then followed a general discussion about items 3 and 4 and
      amongst other things it was suggested that it would be helpful if
      agendas could be circulated at least 14 days in advance and the
      agenda could perhaps contain full details of all matters to be
      discussed.

      It was mentioned by Mr          that Mr.        had now been
      appointed Head of Administration and Legal Department and the
      Group felt it appropriate to record their congratulations to
      M r . o n      his appointment.




GP/262/DMB
24th October, 1989

BH7 5/DMB2410
