 FILE NOTE DATED 24.1.90. MEETING AT NECHELLS POLICE STATION BIRMINGHAM
WITH STJPT TAYLOR AND CHIEF INSPECTOR TOBE TO DISCUSS VARIOUS ASPECTS
OF THE HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY.__________________________________________


1. C/Supt Foster was away ill.   Mervyn Jones was at the Police College.

2. We ha-rl a very useful meeting and covered quite a considerable
   amount of ground.

3.   I recounted briefly Counsel's advice with regard to the holding of an
     Inquest to take "non-contrftversial evidence" and in particular his
     view that we should do this before the D.P.P. had/up nis mind. The
     general view was (and this confirmed my feelings as well) was that
     this was not a good idea. It was likely to be exceedingly difficult
     to control the questioning. The D P.P. might well be unhappy. We
     had already indicated that we were not going to proceed until after
     the D.P.P. had made up his mind and C/lnsp. Tobe pointed out that
     if we did in fact now hold this partial Inquest, people might well
     assume that either the D.P.P. had already decided not to proceed or
     indeed they might take the other view but in either event they would
     feel that some information had passed between us and that that was
     the real reason why we were proceeding. We therefore agreed that
     despite Counsel's opinion, we would stq^k by what we had initially
     decided with regard to timing.

4 . Supt Taylor indicated that although he was not fully aware of all
    the circumstances, the impression that he had formed was that the
    D.P.P. was likely to take a very much quicker decision than had
    initially been anticipated. He had apparently indicated that
    he does not need to see quite as many statements as had been
    produced in the first batch and it was hoped that all the documents
    that he needed to see would be with him by the end of March. That
    he would be responding some time in April. That Further work required
    would be completed by June/July time, by which time a decision would
    be announced. The reason for this increase in speed were the recent
    decisions in Wapping and elsewhere where prosecutions failed because
    theye had been a delay.

5.   We then spent a considerable amount of time looking at the specimen
     folder and mainly discussing minor details of wording in order to
     make it so that I could understand what the references meant. We also
     discussed the question of the precis which had been raised. They felt
     that what would.be best from their point of view would be if I had a look
     at the files, indicated who I wished to call, who I might use as
     documentary and who I wogld not wish to call. With regard to the latter,
     they would then prepared a suitable precis which could be used, assuming
     that it was agreed. We discussed the questions of photographs again
     and it was agreed that each individual folder did not have to have a
     whole set of photographs available. They could select where they had
     several photographs of more or less the same scene, but that there
     should be at least one complete set of photographic evidence. I felt
     that it would be wise to have that set in court in case an issue arose
     as to a particular photograph or not, but that it would then remain as
     part of the archieval material at West Midlands. We discussed the number
     of documents which we would need. The problems as always is that it
     is difficult to decide whetherthe D.P.P. will issue proceedings or not.
     I felt that we did not want to have too many photographs because of the
     cost, but the minimum seemed to me to be at least 2 for the Jury and 2
     for Solicitors and 1 of course for the witness plus the ones that I had
     in front of me.
 We also agreed that it was exceedingly important that whatever
 we did should be excellent as it was vital that people should realise
 that the work had been properly done. The position was to a certain
 extent emeliorated because the familes had already been contacted
 though to discuss the visual evidence, and in that sense they
 to a large extent knew what and where their deceased member was found
 and therefore a lot of the anxiety and pressure had been taken out
 of the matter.
We
discussed the issue of family members attending the Inquest and the
 cost of transportation backwards and forwards. C/lnsp. Tobe wanted
 to know whether we would pay for every and all members of the family
 or whether we would have some restriction. I pointed out that
 normally speaking we would not pay for any family member unless
 they were called as a witness, but it might be that in this case,
 we ought to make some exception and pay for some. We discussed
 whether it might be a good idea to arrange for a coach maybeto take
 people backward and forward or whether we should make some other
 arrangements either using Social Services or not. In the end
 we decided that I would think about this and we would come to some
 decision.
