                  Sheffield Archives Ref: P o ^ | ^ |? (Â£> iH ( *
    i




                     PA CUP SEMI-PINAL

              SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FC GROUND

                   SATURDAY APRIL 15TH

              LIVERPOOL V NOTTINGHAM FOREST



REPORT

At 2. 20 pm I visited the Referee's Dressing Room,
accompanied by Mr G Kirton, and spoke to the four match
officials.

At 2. 30 pm I took my seat in the Directors Box and it
quickly became apparent that while the stands occupied by
the supporters of Nottingham Forest appeared to be full,
the stands allocated to Liverpool were only sparsely
filled - probably less than half.

From 2. 45 pm the Liverpool areas started to fill and the
match started at 3 pm.

Within a few minutes spectators at the Lepping Lane Stand
started to infiltrate on to the pitch and others could be
seen climbing from the lower enclosure into the upper
stand.  Whereas, normally, I would have expected
opposition from those in the upper stand, it was obvious
they were assisting by pulling the spectators from the
lower area.

A few minutes later I saw a Police Officer run on to the
pitch and speak to the referee, who was in the penalty
area at the end of the ground where the pitch invasion
was occuring.  Immediately the referee marshalled the
players and they all left the pitch.

At that stage I thought it was a pitch invasion and that
once the Police had assumed control and the field
cleared, the match would resume.

Withing minutes, large numbers of additional Police were
running from the opposite end of the field, and it was
obvious the incident was more serious that I had
imagi ned.
                                                                    .. . /Cont/. . .
                                    1
A youth ran from the area of the pitch invasion towards
the opposite end of the ground to gesticulate at the
Nottingham Forest spectators.  He was quickly apprehended
by the Police as he returned.

At approximately 3. 15 pm I left my seat and went to the
referee's room and I still thought the situation could be
contained.  The Nottingham Forest spectators were very
noisy because they were, at that stage, acting in the
belief that the stoppage was merely due to a pitch
invasion.
I went on to the field with the referee and it quickly
became apparent that this was a major incident and we
were soon informed that there were casualties.  By 3.30
pm we were informed that some of the casualties were
fatal and people in the enclosure were being crushed.   In
the meantime members of the Fire  Brigade had arrived.

At approximately 3.30 pm I was called by the Chief
Executive, Mr Graham Kelly, to a meeting in the
Directors' Room.  Present at the meeting were members of
the three clubs, their Secretaries, the Chairman of the
FA Challenge Cup Committee, Mr Ernest Brown, Mr Graham
Kelly, Mr Glen Kirton and myself.   Mr Kelly informed us
that he had asked the Senior Police Officer in the
control room to come down to the Director's Room, and he
arrived within a few minutes.   The referee was also
present.
Even, at that stage, in spite of the Police Officer' s
information about fatal casualties, some members still
felt that the game should be restarted if at all
possible.
The agreed decision was that the match would have to be
abandoned.  The Police Commander asked that no
announcement should be made to anyone at that stage as he
wanted to keep all roads free for the emergency services.
On a question from the referee, the advice was the
players should not be informed at that stage.  It was
agreed that no action would be taken until advised by the
Police.




                                               . /Cont/.
I returned to the pitch with the referee and found that
the atmosphere was a mixture of distraught grief,
helplessness and anger.  The latter came from spectators
who were holding complete tickets which had not been
checked on entry, allegations that it had been caused by
ticket allocation and the fencing.

I noted that there was a line of police across the whole
width of the pitch on the centre line and I was told that
it was to prevent Liverpool spectators reaching those at
the Nottingham Forest end.  My immediate thought was they
could have been better used in dealing with casualties.

After nearly an hour, while in the area of the Referee's
Room, I was told that an announcement had already been
made by the public address system that the match had been
abandoned and a special request that the crowd should
leave quietly.

On returing to the field, it was obvious that all the
casualties had been removed, most of the Police had been
dispersed and the crowds were quietly filtering away.

I referred earlier to the noisy behaviour of the
spectators at the Nottingham Forest end of the ground,
but once the gravity of the situation became clear, the
whole crowd became completely silent and from then their
behaviour was impeccable.




A D McMullen
Vice-Chairman
