                                                                                          WG401
                                                                                          (S.O.B25)
                           WEST MIDLANDS POLICE

                                                                   Reference:

From: Detective Superintendent Taylor            X /R   Nechells   Station:     Nechells Green

To:   ACC Mr Jones Sheffield                                       Date:        15 June 1989


SUBJECT:   S AFE TY   ENGINEERS




Concerning your enquiry of safety engineering firms and their
interpretation of Annex ’C ’, of the Guide To Safety at Sports Grounds, I
have been in touch with Mr Keith Hebden of Nuttall Yarwood and Partners, 3
Marningham Villas, Bradford, BD8 7HB, (Phone 0274-493429 - Fax
0274544654), and he is able to provide the information required both in
regard to crush barriers and Pen/Ground capacity.

I have discussed our requirement with Mr Hebden and informed him to expect
a letter from you 16.6.89, he will then provide the required information
in letter form, either pm on Monday 19.6.89, or am the following day. The
delay is because his companys expert on Pen/Ground capacity is currently
on holiday and not expected back until the 19.6.89.

Nuttall Yarwood and Partners are currently safety engineers for Aston
Villa, Barnsley, and Bradford City, and Hull Rugby and other Rugby clubs
and Mr Hebden was most helpful in regard to our inquiry. In fact he
explains that within his firm different offices used different
interpretations of the safety at Sports Ground Guide in relation to crush
barriers._________




R I Taylor
Detective Superintendent




                           p \    C   'J   ‘ 4   ;-     ""




       r-Ji v J js J x rr';'
                                                                             WG401
                                                                             (8.0.B25)
                       WEST MIDLANDS POLICE

                                                     Reference:

From: Detective Superintendent Taylor I/R Nechells   Station:     Nechells Green
To:   ACC Mr Jones Sheffield                         Date:      15 June 1 9 8 9


SUBJECT:   SAFETY ENGINEERS




Concerning your enquiry of safety engineering firms and their
interpretation of Annex ’C ’, of the Guide To Safety at Sports Grounds, I
have been in touch with Mr Keith Hebden of Nuttall Yarwood and Partners, 3
Marningham Villas, Bradford, BD8 7HB, (Phone 0274-493429 - Fax
0274544654), and he is able to provide the information required both in
regard to crush barriers and Pen/Ground capacity.

I have discussed our requirement with Mr Hebden and informed him to expect
a letter from you 16.6.89, he will then provide the required information
in letter form, either pm on Monday 19.6.89, or am the following day. The
delay is because his companys expert on Pen/Ground capacity is currently
on holiday and not expected back until the 19.6.89.

Nuttall Yarwood and Partners are currently safety engineers for Aston
Villa, Barnsley, and Bradford City, and Hull Rugby and other Rugby clubs
and Mr Hebden was most helpful in regard to our inquiry. In fact he
explains that within his firm different offices used different
interpretations of the safety at Sports Ground Guide in relation to crush
barriers.




R I Taylor
Detective Superintendent
