                                                               David John Hirst
                                                           Police Constable 7**^
                                                        Divisional Intelligence
                                                                     F Division


I am a Police Constable in the South Yorkshire Police, at present in the
Divisional Intelligence Office at Ecclesfield Police Station.     Prior to 2b
April 1 9 8 9 , I was stationed at Hanunerton Road Police Station in the same
capacity.

Part of my duties involve assisting Detective Sergeant 952 Charlesworth in
connection with football intelligence for the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
at Hillsborough, and also the processing of prisoners from that ground on match
days .

On Saturday 15 April 1989 , the day of the FA Cup Semi Final between Liverpool
and Nottingham Forest,     I paraded for duty at 7.00 a.m. and commenced
Intelligence Patrol with Detective Sergeant 952 Charlesworth, checking on any
sites where there was any possible missiles (stones, rocks etc) that could be
used by supporters travelling to the ground. With the exception of one pile of
tarmac pieces near to the Parkside Section Station and a new site near to the
AFG Car Sales, Penistone Road, the roads around Hillsborough were clear and the
only early supporters arriving were from Liverpool, these were sighted near to
a cafe on Middlewood Road.     This was reported back to Inspector Sewell and
action was taken to remove the material from Parkside and the car sales of AFG
were informed of the possible danger or damage to motor vehicles on display.

This was followed by the match briefing which I attended and which Detective
Sergeant Charlesworth took part in.

Together with Detective Sergeant Charlesworth we resumed Intelligence Patrol in
the Hillsborough, Middlewood, Oughtibridge, Fox Hill, Southey, Herries and
Penistone Road areas re early arrival of fans.

Liverpol fans were sighted parking up on Middlewood Road near to the Middlewood
Tavern and also on the Tavern car park.      The fans were also walking in the
general direction of these licensed premises. This was before the commencement
of licensing hours and this information was passed to ground control, Police
Sergeant  Goddard.    On arrival   in the Fox Hill area a    few minutes later
Liverpool fans were queuing outside The Fox public house, Fox Hill Road. This
information was passed to ground control.

Movement of both sets of    fans in the vicinity of the ground and on all
approach roads to the ground was monitored and traffic was moving freely. On
reaching the Penistone Road area fans were drinking on the footpaths outside
the Royal and Rose Inn.

We returned to the ground at 1.00 p.m. and collected hot meals from the mobile
kitchen and returned to Hammerton Road Police Station from where we were to
work Prisoner Process for prisoners from the game (Nottingham Forest fans).

Our route back to Hammerton Road took us past the Royal (about 12 deep outside
drinking) there were also crowds on the footpath drinking outside the Rose and
the New Barrack.

After meal returned to theground using   the same route as to travel in prior
to meal. By this   time both the Barrack and Royal were closed but fans were
drinking on both sides of the road outside of the Rose.     Crowds were moving
towards the ground but traffic was still moving freely.

By this time it was approaching kick-off time and on arrival at the ground
some of the players were having a pre-match kick about on the pitch.

I was informed that there were prisoners to go to Hammerton Road and asked to
remain at the ground to act as escort.      Sergeant Charlesworth returned to
Hammerton Road.  A short time later I returned to Hammerton Road and commenced
prisoner process duties.    Whilst waiting for verification of the last three
prisoners, a call was received by Sergeant Charlesworth from a Mrs           Ln
Skelmersdale, re her son, being detained.    A check was made with both FI and
F2 Control Rooms but neither had any knowledge of any call to Mrs         With
Sergeant Charlesworth, I attended at the Sheffield Wednesday ground where it
was ascertained that Mrs          son had in fact been arrested prior to the
match, cautioned and ejected from the ground. There was no trace of him being
booked in as a casualty.   We then returned to Hammerton Road, where Mrs
was informed by telephone of the result.

The final three prisoners were dealt with.

With Sergeant Charlesworth, we      then went to a briefing by Detective
Superintendent McKay.   Detailed to arrange transport for those people wanting
a lift    home  to Liverpool or other       destinations  or  alternative  for
accommodation.    Engaged with Sergeant Charlesworth re this enquiry and
liaising with Social Workers at Hillsborough Boys Club, Forbes Hall and the
Gymnasium at Hillsborough.

I was then released from duty at 12 midnight.




                 /Â£
^office Constable 7 ^
