                                                            Federation Office
POLICE FEDERATION,                                          Police Headquarters
                                                            Snig Hill
SOUTH YORKSHIRE PO                                   U -i   Sheffield   S3 8LY

JOINT   BRANCH        BOARD                                 Telephone (0742) 768522
                                                             lx . No. 0742 729126



                                               aa            YOUR REFERENCE




                                                             OUR REFERENCE
  TO:   All Members of the South Yorkshire
        Police Joint Branch Board                        11 December 1991.


  Dear Member,
       The fourth quarterly meeting of the Joint Branch Board was held on
  Wednesday, 4 December 1991, at the "Pickwick" Restaurant, High Green,
  Sheffield, commencing at 10 a.m.
       The minutes of that meeting are set out hereunder for your
  information.
       Before commencing the meeting, the Chairman asked members to stand
  for a few moments as a mark of respect for Sergeant Alan King who had
  been murdered in London.
  1.      ATTENDANCE
          P. Middup                                 R.   Lax
                                                    M.   Young
                                                    G.   Millett
                                                    R.   Hooley
                                                    B.   Walker
                                                    I.   Selwood
                                                    G.   Sykes
                                                    A.   Timms
                                                    P.   McGinley*
                                                    J.   Wood


  ^Denotes non-attendance.
  The Chairman welcomed Mr. Timms, the Inspectors' representative for
  Headquarters C.I.D.
   2.     MINUTES OF THE LAST MEETING
                     proposed and                seconded that the minutes
          of the last meeting were a true record. All members agreed.
   The Chairman informed members that the Annual General Meeting
   next year would now be held on Monday, 6 January 1992 and not
   the 8th.
                                                             4.

  The Secretary said regarding Annual Leave, we had gone to
  arbitration on this and it had been left in abeyance. The
  Official Side were quite prepared to give it us providing we
  went along with everything else but the Federation refused.
  We were now returning to arbitration and asking for an award
  to be made in time for the 1992 leave year.
C) Hillsborough Disaster. The Secretary reported we were
   proceeding with the claims and it was proving long and drawn
   out but being contested. The lawyers were dealing with this.
   Mr. Middup mentioned one of our police officers who had been
   entitled to our help and Â£200 had already been spent on this
   officer. However, the solicitors had tried contacting him to
   no avail and he had also failed to attend two medical
   examinations. The Secretary said because of this he asked
   members for permission to instruct our solicitors to close
   their file on this individual and not to bother any more.
   All members agreed.
  _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ commented we could not afford to throw money away
  like this and secondly, we should not proceed with this.
               suggested sending a registered letter to the
   officer informing him of our decision so that the Federation
   could not be criticised at a later stage that the matter was
   just dropped.
               said this officer could be suffering from a
   trauma problem and it would be an idea to get his
   representative to have a word with the officer. He also
   asked for the Publications Sub-Committee to make a note on
   this for their next newsheet. All members agreed to this.
D) C.P.S. - Court Attendances - Unnecessary Deviations. This
   matter was being dealt with at the J.N.C.C. An interim
   report had been given at the last J.N.C.C. Indications are
   in some areas that some people are being very badly used.
   Mr. Middup said it was turning out to be a very good
   exercise. Satisfactory at J.N.C.C. and proceeding pretty
   well. It was noted that only one in eight officers at
   Doncaster called to attend Crown Court, were in actual fact
   required to give evidence.
E) Sale of Police Houses. This matter went to the Police
   Committee meeting because of a procedural difficulty -
   Councillor Fisher objected and the item did not go through.
   However, it will be on the agenda again for the next Police
   Committee meeting where it is expected to be accepted.
   We had received a complaint from Sergeant! _ _ _ Iat Wickersley
   who had suffered for years because his police house was the
   property used for our rent allowance purposes. We had
   arranged for him to buy it anyway because of what he had
   suffered in the past. We were then told by Sergeant
