                                                       ^        rqMy


                 DOCKLANDS HISTORY PROJECT     HILLSBOROUGH TTvSTTMDNV




I        Your name?



I        And your address?



I        Are you employed?



I        Did you have a ticket for the match?

         Yes.

I        Where was this for?

         The terraces, Leppings Lane.

I        What time did you leave Liverpool?

ZZI      We got the train at half-past nine from Liverpool and we
got      into Sheffield at about half eleven.

I        Did you stop at any time on the way?

         No, just stopped at intermediate stations.

I        What time did you arrive at Sheffield?

   I We got to Sheffield at half-past eleven but we went round
 the shops so I think we got to the ground about two o'clck.

I        How did you know v^hat time it was?

     Well, I know I went in about twenty-past two because the
policeman on horse told us to go in and we'd been there about
half-an-hour. I think it was between about9 half-one when we
decided we were going to leave Sheffield. Because we were
walking round the town and I kept looking at my watch thinking
I didn t want to be late.        /                        ^

 I       When you arrived at the ground, what was happening?
             ;         /-- a


 L.JV--
/;   '             '           .A,



                                     \
                                         \
     Well, we got off a bus at the top of the Lane and walked
down Leppings Lane and we stood outside for a while. There were
just people walking too and fro, normal, and we just stood
around and waited for a while and then, about twenty-past,
there was a policewoman on a horse who told us to start going
in, so we started moving towards the entrance.

I    Did you see any police officers on your way to the ground?

  I There was one policewoman on a horse. There was another
bloke on a horse because he was a bit behind us and he was
telling people to move on. We noticed that in particular
because he was shouting at them a bit. Probably no more than
normal, but it was my first away match so I was noticing it.

I    The policeman was shouting at some football supporters?

ZD   oh yes. Well they always do, like. He was saying,   'Just
get in.' you know.

I    He was anxious to get them down to the ground?

     Yes.

I    Did you have any direct contact with any of the police
officers you saw on your way to the ground?

     No, we didn't talk to any but when we went into the actual
ground I had a bag with me that I wanted to leave, so when we
got to the turnstiles, one policeman checked my bag and when I
went through another one checked my bag more thoroughly. The
first didn t check my bag because I was expecting him to
because he was checking other people's, he just let me through.
But the other one checked it quite thouroghly and I told him
that I wanted to leave it. And then I left it with the police
property store or something, that was inside the ground. There
was a policeman there.

I    Were you easily able to find the entrance to that part of
the ground you had a ticket for?

     Yes. Well, on the ticket there was a number, I think it
was LL2 or something, which was differnt to what my boyfriend
had. And then we were with another bloke who had a ticket for
the seated area in another part of the ground, I think it was
the North Stand. So, we knew vaguely and they had been there
before so they knew the entrance, well, the first turnstile,
where that was, so that was fairly easy to get to, yes.

I    When you got there, what were your feelings at that time?
When you got to the entrance before you went through?

     I wanted to make sure I dropped my bag off and nothing
particularly different, like.




                           2.
I    Was there a queue?

     Yes, we queued to get into the turnstile. It didn't take
us that long. We were queueing, the gate that was opened, I
think, was to the left and we were queuing there. And while we
were actually going along, and I was looking at the policeman
infront, thinking that he was going to check my bag, there was
a steward on that gate... There was either a steward on the
gate but there was definately a policeman behind it, through
the gate. Because, I think it was a steward came up with a
bloke to let him through that gate and the policeman opened it
and then shut it straight away and he nearly shut the bloke
out. The steward got through but the bloke nearly got shut in
he nearly shut his fingers in. So they opened it again. And   ’
when I think back I remembered that. But we queued alongside
that gate and then went through the turnstile, but it wasn't
particularly... well, it was crowded but it wasn't anythine
different.                                                6

I    What was the atmosphere like at that time?

   I Just normal, everyone just waiting to get in, nothing
different. We started to go in about twenty-past, that would be
about half-past, something like that.

I    What were police officers doing in the area around?

—    I saw one outside the turnstile who was checking bags,
because he frisked someone in fornt of me and I said, 'I wonder
if he s going to frisk me.' I remember that. And then when I
went in the one who was a bit more 'official', he looked right
through my bag and asked me what was in it. And after that, I
went round... I asked where I could leave my bag, if there was
a St. John's Ambulance or something because I usually leave it
in there. And he said there was a police property stall around
on the left. So I went there. There was apoliceman and a
policewoman in there.

I    Did you actually speak to the one outside the
turnstile?

     No, he just let me in?

I    What did the man on the other side say to you?

~ I He said, 'What's in your bag?' And I said 'A file.'
because I'd just bought a file. And I said, 'is there somewhere
I can leave it?'

I    And that's when he directed you to the POlice Property
Service?

     Yes.




                          3
I    Did you find that easily?

     Yes, fairly easily. There was a bloke selling photographs
m front of it and then behind that it said 'Police Property
Stall' or something and I just went to there.

I      Did you have a conversation with the police officers
there?

     Yes, they asked me what was in it as well. There was a
policeman and a policewoman. Ican't remember, one of them took
my name and address into this book and I think they asked what
was in it and I said, there was  a mirror because there was a
mirror inside the file. But I didn't want to tell the policeman
on turnstile in case he told me off. But I told that bloke,
that was why I wanted to leave it there because I didn't want
it to get broken. He was quite nice about it and said I could
pick it up after.

I     Was your ticket torn off?

      Yes.

I    When you got through the turnstiles, apart from the police
officer who was searching you, and the ones at the property
station, did you see any other police officers around?

--- 1 No.
|

I    Were there any stewards inside the ground?

C D No. I didn't see anybody. There was a bloke selling
programmes but I didn't see anyone else.

I    How were you directed to your own section then?

ZD   We weren't because there was a bloke selling programmes on
my left when I went in through the turnstiles and behind that
was the property stall. There was something, I think it was
steps going up which, I think, was maybe for the stands with
seats in it, because I wondered if we should go in that. The
only   entrance that we saw to go in was the 'B tunnel that we
went   in. Because I remember thinking, when we first got the
tickets, the LL2 number on mine was different from my
boyfriends so I didn't know if we were going to be in the same
bit. But in the end, we just went through the same tunnel
because it was the only one that we saw.

I     Where exactly did you end up standing then? You went
through the tunnel?...

     We went through the tunnel. When we got through the
tunnel, there was loads of people standing so we went into the
middle of that and in front of me, the left goalpost of the



                             4   -
goal, where we ended up standing, was   sort of in front of me.
When it started getting a bit more packed, I wanted to move and
I looked over to ray left and saw the next bit was empty. I
said, 'Can't we go over there?' But we didn't know how to get
there and by then it was getting too packed to move anyway. And
then I said, 'Can we go to the front?1 And ray boyfriend said,
 No, stay at the back.' because you get pushed around more at
the front. So we were quite near... there were about two lines
of people behind us, right to the back of the terraces. But by
the time the match had started, we had moved over to the right
hand side of the goalpost was in front of me.

I    What time did you reach the place you were standing before
kick-off?

    We must have got in between half-two and twenty-to-three.

I    How did you feel at that time?

     I was panicking right from the start really. It's always
crowded but it felt different because I remember thinking,
'It's just me.' And I also remember thinking, 'Well, once the
match starts you can see more anyway.' because that s what
usually happens. So, for a while, you just hold on, you think
it's alright, but I was getting a bit panicky. But I thought it
was just my first away match. But I remember thinking that if
anything happened I wouldn't be able to get out. But I just
thougat ..oh... I was just panicking. I did ask my boyfriend to
move, he was looking at the programme and everything, but it
was getting a bit more packed. This was getting on to the time
the match started now. Once the match started, there was
someone leaning on my hair, I couldn't see a single thing.
Normally you can see a bit of it but I couldn't see anything,
because the next day I saw it, they were playing in white and I
hadn't even noticed it on the day, I just didn't see a thing,
there was somebody on my hair, so my head was sort of , up like
that (she demonstrates her head being pulled back so her face
is pointed up at the sky). I was sort of, looking upwards. I
remember getting angry and I said to my boyfriend, he couldn't
hear me then but I said, 'I can't move.' I was getting a bit
angry. He said afterwards, they weren't leaning on me, because
I thought someone was leaning on me. Because, sometimes, they
lean on you but he said they were just, like, pushed up against
me. But I was just starting to get panicky.


I   Were you aware of any police officers in the ground?

     Well, there's always the police there, so I knew they were
there but ...

I   Were you aware of any stewards in the ground?
there1 WaSn,t lookin§ out for anY but I know they're normally

I    You said how you were feeling. What was the atmosphere
like around you?                                      F


     I think of it differently at different times. Once the
match started, everyone was looking at the match, 'cause I
couldn t see a thing and I knew I was missing it out. But as it
went on the^atmosphere was changing. First of all, I started
Setting panicky but I didn't want to say anything to my
boyfriend to seem wimpy' like, so I didn't say anything; but I
was getting squashed. And then, I started saying to him     'I
want to move. There were people at that time starting to go
oveer the front and a few people were shouting at them to set
down. But I was getting really panicky by then. I didn't know
what they were going over for, my first impression looking
back, was just remembering I'd seen them. What I was more aware
of that I was panicking and I wanted to get out. And I looked
behind me and there was a bloke being pulled up. That was the
only one I d seen,  just one bloke going up. And I remember
thinking, Well, I want to get out and if I go up there I don't
think anyone would   tell me off.' Because lots of people were
standing there and   they were helping him. So I said, 'I want to
get out and my boyfriend said to someone and they're always
really good when you want to get out. Somebody pulled me ud
onto the stands.                                             v

I    When were you first aware that something was wrong, that
things weren t normal.

     Well, ifc wasn't normal to me because I have never been
pulled out of a match before. I was just panicky. I thought at
first it was just me. I didn't know why the bloke had been
pulled up. But I realised when I got up there because I turned
around when I got up and everyone was climbing over the front
and everyone was shouting, you could tell.. And everyone had
started pulling. Everyone where I was standing could see what
was happening and they were starting to pull people up and they
was turning round and saying, 'Get back.1 to us that were on
the stands. And most people were just standing there, in shock,
watching what was happening cause I just stood for a while
shaking and watching what was happening. And then the people at
the front, who were helping everyone out, were saying   *Get
back, get back.' so every so often, I was trying to clamber
further up the stands, but then I was stopping because I was
panicking that I was going to get crushed in there.

I    Can you describe, in as much detail as possible, what
happened between 3.06 when the game was abandoned and when vou
left the ground?                                           3
      Well, when I got pulled up must have been around the time
that they stopped the match. I think the game was still going
on when I first started panicking and got pulled out. But there
was a time between getting pulled up when I was just shaking
really. So that must have been when they were taking them off.
After that, I was standing on the stands looking down below and
I saw people climbing over the front and then from then on
until about... Host of the time I was standing there and not
really... Imean, I could see things happening but I wasn't
thinking straight. First of all, the first thing I thought was
that my boyfriend was going to come up after me. And this woman
said... I said, 'where s my mate?' and she said, 'Oh, she'll be
coming up in a minute'. I couldn't even think to say, 'oh, it's
a boy.' or anything. And then someone came up to me and said to
me, 'You dropped your purse.' I wasn't really thinking, I
wasn't bothered or anything. So I was standing there. Every so
often I was thinking, 'Where's      |?' my boyfriend. But then I
was sort of really rational about it, I thought, 'He'll be
helping people.' I could see people being pulled out over the
front. There were people around me shouting things all the time
 that were affecting what you thought. Like, there was somebody
on the pitch and I saw people trying to rescusitate people and
 I knew one person had died because there was something over his
 face but apart from that I was watching people being pulled
 out, people I thought had fainted. And then after a while, as
 it went on, every so often I was thinking about, 'Where's
          ?' and I just thought, 'He'll be helping people.' and
 'He'll be down there.' And then I heard, I can't tell the exact
 amount of time it was, but I think it was maybe half-an-hour to
 three-quarters of an hour before I got with him again, got back
 down onto the terraces. At one point, I heard them say, 'Will
 all fans clear the terraces?' So I started thinking, he must
 have gone out and I had arranged to meet him back where I was
 going to pick my bag up. So I rember thinking, 'Shall I leave?'
 I wasn't doing anything, I was just thinking all these things
 in my mind. At the same time I could see people going onto the
 pitch and I was trying to work out whether they were just
 taking people onto the pitch that were hurt, because there were
 other people who were, by then, as it gradually cleared, there
 were peopl climbing onto the pitch. And so I trying to work out
 whether he would have gone onto the pitch or stayed there. And
 I was trying to remember what he was wearing because there were
 lots os people being dragged out and everything. So I was
 looking out for him but then every so often, I wasn't thinking
 of him, I was just noticing all these people. Because people
 around me were saying... some were saying, 'He's dead. He s
 dead.' And other people had been pulled up and were shouting
  about it. It was the people around me, the ones at the front
  that were'pulling people out, knew what was happening because
  they were dragging everybody   up and they were telling
  everybody to get back. They saved loads of people, pulling them
  up, and they could see that it was all crushed at the front.
  The other thing I noticed was loads of fans running back and
  too and fro and everyhthing. Because, that night, I saw a bit



                             "4
on the news and they showed on bit of the fans taking people
accross the field but they were doing that all the time. I was
noticing that, that it was all the fans helping people, I
didn't see the police helping people. The thing I saw most
about the police was, after awhile, they came and stood accross
the whole half of the pitch, that was after a few people had
run towards the other end, and the police made a line accross
the pitch, but that's the most I remember the police doing,
really. And then after a while, I saw an ambulance come down by
the goal, then you knew it was pretty bad. Most of all it was
just confusion, nobody knew what was happening. You knew it was
bad but I thought maybe five people might have died until I got
onto the bus and somebody had a radio. I didn't realise it was
that bad. The bloke next to me, he was really shaking still,
because I stopped shaking and just went numb and he was
shaking. And then there was all confusion and there were people
saying things over the loud hailer but you couldn't hear it
until I heard one bit were they were saying tc^clear the
terraces, because I remember thinking maybeP      gone. Then
after maybe three-quarters of an hour or something, I started
thinking a bit more, thinking that I would go down maybe.
Because I was quite high up in the stands and the stands were
getting full as well, and I remember thinking... I was
panicking that maybe I wouldn't be able to get out of there.
There were a whole load of people in front of me in the stands
by then. Then I started thinking, 'Maybef      still down on
the terraces.' So, gradually, I went back down, and looked out
over the terraces and saw him standing there. And quite a lot
of the terraces were quite a lot emptier by then, and so I went
down. I was scared to go down because somebody told me that
somebody had just got their arm pulled off or something or
somebody had hurt their arm. So I was still panicking, and I
had to go down. So then I went down.

I    Down the stairs behind the...?

ZD   No, somebody let me down from the stand onto the terrace
again. And then we just stood there for a while because they
said nobody should leave. That was just before Kenny Daglish
came on an said for everyone to stay calm. Another thing was,
at the beginning, when I was being pulled out., it was either
while I still on the terraces or when I'd been pulled up, the
people round me knew that people were getting crushed because
they were shouting, 'Shitty ground, shitty ground.' They knew.
That was one thing that startled me, that the people who pulled
me up knew what was happening and the police must have known
what was happening and not doing anything. Because the fans
were doing everything. So, they knew what was happening. The
fans were really brilliant, they really were... And then after,
I was standing there with     , waiting, and there were dquite
afew people still standing on the terraces and they said, over
the thing, not to go, to stay until they'd cleared the area and
everything. So, we stood there for a while and I did see one
thing where, I didn't see what happened but on the terraces,



                            *3
there was a few policemen on the terraces and there was one,
and he didn't have his jacket on anymore and he didn't have his
helmet on, but something happpened... I didn't see the
incident, but you know when something happens in a crowd
because everyone around you shouts. So you might not see what
happens but you see the reaction ofit. And I know he must
have got in a tussle or something with somebody. But,
spontaneously, everybody above started shouting at this
policmanand he started shouting back, something like... some
kind of justification for it. He was shouting back at the crowd
and there were other policemen around him, holding him. Like,
people were really tense, you know? And then, beside me,
because by the time I got back on the terraces, I was standing
next to the entrance to the tunnel, before went back down and
there were a few stewards by then, there were a couple of girls
as well, somebody came round with some water. And there were a
couple of policemen there and I saw someone shouting, just
shouting like... they are just things that I can remember
happening. I saw that at the front it had been cut out, the
fence at the front, but I never saw that before.

I    When did you leave   the ground? Did you make any attempt to
leave the ground before   most of the other people seemed to be
leaving?

     No. They came over the speaker and said don't leave the
ground yet. And there were dribs and drabs of people going out
after that, but we stayed for quite a long time. Because, I
think, when we were actually walking away from the ground, I
looked at my watch and it was something like a quarter-to... or
ten-to-five because I remeber thinking it was time when it
would have finished anyway.

I    When you came to leave the ground, did anybody try to stop
you?

     No.

I    Did you see any police officers in the area around the
terraces?

     Do you mean the stands or outside the ground?

I    Behind were you were standing but while you were still
inside, before you got out into the street.

ZD   When I got back on the terraces there was a couple of
policemen come through the tunnel, were standing in the tunnel
entrance, "and there was a steward there as well because
somebody started shouting at him, the steward. They were having
an argument, you know, jsut a bloke who was a bit upset, like.

I    As you were leaving the ground, but were still inside, did
you see any police officers then.


                            ‘l
□    I can't remember actually going back through the tunnel
but I remember getting outside through the tunnel. Once I'd got
outside the tunnel, I started making my way away police were
around then, I think.

I    Did you go back to the Property Office?

     Oh yes. I went back to the Property Office to get my bag
and the policeman there was really nice. He was saying,
 Alright love?' and everything... but in a nice way. I said
something like, 'I've come to get my bag' and he said, 'Oh yes
of course.' He was alright about it, he was a bit shook up. It’
was just him on his own then and when I came out the woman was
going back in or something.

I    Did you see any stewards around at that time?

     No. While I was still on the terraces, there was one going
round with some water but then I didn't see any others that I
can remember. I don't remember seeing the bloke selling the
programmes again, but then they're usually sold out by then
anyway.

I    When you left the ground, did you stay outside the ground?

□    When we got outside the ground, I'd arranged to meet
somebody by this post, so we went straight over to where he
was. The look on his face... We went over there and met him.
And I think there was an ambulance still outside when we got
out, because I remember having to walk round it. Then I saw a
bloke from the corner shop, because I said, 'Oh there's the
bloke from the corner shop.' and theywere going in a different
way. A crowd always, when you get out, always dissipates. So we
got out and we went and met this friend. We didn't know where
we were going everybody was walking the same way so we started
walking off, which was the opposite way from which we come. But
it led onto this railway station, but: T wasn't going back to
Liverpool, I was going to               because we were staying
overnight with my boyfriends parents, so we just walked up that
way. Everybody was walking the same way.

I    Did you see any police officers outside the ground?

     Yes, as we gradually walked away there were. Because
people were saying things about them.

I    Did you have any direct contact with them.

     Only when we got up to    the station which was,   like,aten
minute walk away. I think it was either apoliceman or
stationmaster or something, all in black... but he said we
couldn't get this train. So then we went down and got on a bus
that was going back and they said we didn't have to pay and
everything, I thought that was really nice. They were really


                          10
this was quite a long time after, after I goet back in the
terraces, somebody shouted at the steward and everything. And
there was that one incident where there was a policeman and a
bloke that I didn't actually see but everybody was shouting and
the policeman was all. like, huffy and everything. But I didn't
see anyone actually violent.

I    Did you witness any trouble between groups of rival
supporters?

     No. In fact, when we were on the bus on the way to
Leppings Lane, we said, 'We must be coming in from the Forest
end.' because there were loads of Forest fans on our side. All
the people we saw walking along were Forest fans.

I    Did you see any violence against any individuals including
members of the public or the emergency services?

     No.

I    Against any police officers, apart from the incident you
mentioned?

     No.

I    Against any members of the press or media?

     No.

I    Against any football supporters, be they followers of
Liverpool or Nottingham Forest?

ZD   When we got there, when we started going towards the
ground, the policeman on the horse sort of, he pushed the bloke
along. Because I remember turning round and saying, 'They
always have an antagonistic attitude.' I noticed it more that
day because it was my first away match. When we first to
Liverpool and went on the train, as the train sets out, there's
about three policemen in our carriage - it wasn't even a
football special train because there were old people, young
people at different stations, getting on at Manchester and
things like that. But when it first set out from Liverpool,
they were just standing on the train and walking up and down
and the guard was extra vigilent about seeing your railcard and
things lilke that. It was a sort of atmosphere all the time.
It's not violence, but it's an antagonistic atmosphere. And
when we got to Sheffield, when we got off the train, there’s a
line of police between you getting off the train and going
towards a special coach but it was only half-past eleven so we
wanted to go round the town. But to get through the barricade
of police. They didn't ask me 'cause I'm a girl, you know,
never cause trouble, but they asked the two blokes I was with,
'Where are you going?' That's a form of violence, if you like.
But we got through that and then when we got to the ground,



                        u
nice, because they knew something bad had happened. There were
policemen standing outside that bus.

I    You say that people were shouting things at the police?

HI   No, no. They were talking about them but people weren't
shouting things out.

I    From the railway station, where was the bus...?

     We walked up this hill and  there was a train   station on
the hill but we couldn't get the train from there    so we walked
back down this sort of hill, it  was agreat wide     road, there
were a lot of people on it. And  there was a whole   line of buses
so we just got on one of them.

I    Were they private buses or were they coaches?

      I think they had 'Football' written on them, because I
remember thinking this must be a special.We didn't have to pay
and it was going straight back to the scheduled station. WE had
to wait until it filled up and then it took us back.

I    Did you see anyone who appeared to be drunk, either
before, during or after the match?

     Weel before the match, when we got there, we walked down
Leppings Lane and we stood for something like, twenty minutes
outside the ground. And we were standing next to a crowd of
blokes who were singing and they had obviously been drinking,
But quite jovial because I was standing right next to them. You
know, sometimes you're next to people that you wouldn't stand
next to because they're drunk. But they were, like, happy
drunk, all singing about winning and everything and I was.
singing along with them. They were drunk, but it was nothing
new.

I    About how many?

     Six to ten, something like that.

I    Did you see anyone arrested by the police at any time
during the day?

     NO.

I    Did you at anytime, after arriving at Sheffield, witness
any violence; within groups of Liverpool supporters?

     No.   I saw, it's not violence, like when I got pulled up
into the   stands everyone was panicking, you don t see it but
you feel   everybody moving. I don't even know what had happened,
somebody   could have fallen over or something, it wasn't
violence   it just made me scared. There was people shouting,
like I said, he pushed this bloke along. That's nothing new but
it creates... Later on, when I d got back down to the terrace
there was that incident on the terrace where there was a      *
policeman having some sort of confrontation with someone, a
fan. And then there was a fan shouting at a steward and two
other policemen standing there.

I    Is there anything else you wish to add to what you've
already said?                                       3

             was my first away match so I noticed things that I'd
        £ lt:*.£e^ re bu£ never experinced in the same way. Like,
 at the football match there s always police standing around and
 it always makes me a bit... Like in the match, about ten
minutes before the end, they always have a big line of police
coming on and it stops you seeing the match. Because you see
 this big line of beetles coming out; it distracts you from vhat
you re watching. It always gets you a bit anyway, that's sort
of making you feel a bit put out, that kind of feeling. I felt
 that day that from the minute of getting on the train, there's
people watching you and from getting off the train at
Sheffield, and having to explain why you want to go to the
shops. And when you got there, they always push you around with
the horses, and things like that. I think that's significant
Because the only way you ever see the police at a football
match is as there to control you and to stop you. They're
always checking your tickets, they're always stopping you, they
don t give you any credibility for anything. And I think that's
how they seemed to see themselves on the day, as well. They
were just ther to stop you doing anything. When we came out of
the ground, which is like always, like yesterday when I went to
the Derby, the police are just there they have a presence and
they try and look like they re making a presence. THey have
their vans. Like yesterday when I came out of the Derby, you
couldn t move and there was a police van stopping everyone's
way, because they just have to be there. And I think that made
everything worse on the day. Because the police were trying to
stop everybody and controlling them, they weren't helping
anybody. I found out later that the police are trained in first
aid and I didn t see them doing anything except standing round
in groups of two or three, or making a barricade accross the
whole ground. That s the lasting impression - that hey didn’t
do anything except try and stop people who weren't doing
anything anyway. And the other lasting impression is what
people d i d . Like, someone pulled me out and pulled loads of
other people out. And I saw loads and loads of fans just
carrying people. And you have to remember that it was really a
exceptional situation people around you, spontaneously, you
were just hugging other people. And when we left, when. I was on
t e terraces at the end, a bloke came up, I'll never see him
again, and said,      See you around.' and hugged you. Some people
got angry, but even when you're angry, youYre still shaking
from what you ve seen. It's something you're not going to see
every day so people arn't... People are frustrated but they


                           15
arn't angry in a way they've thought it out, they just express
it, shout or something. But mostly, people were shocked. They
were still shaking so they couldn't... Like I've heard people
say, 'They were all rushing towards the Forest fans when the
police came out.' But that s rubbish, there were a few people
running and everyone was shouting at them to get back. Everyone
was saying, from round where I was, 'Ah no! Don't!' It was the
same yesterday, at the Derby, at the end, about two or three
kids ran onto the pitch and everyone was shouting at them and
they came back. That's what people are like, they want... You
can tell that's right because of what people have done in the
weeks that followed.
If I had anything to say, I'd want to counteract the view that
the police were there to keep order and do things positive
because they didn't do anything positive. And the idea that the
fans were there to make trouble, because they saved people. I
really want to say that because of everything they said in the
few days after really got me. Like the whole Inquiry. And when
 they blame the fans it 11 just prove to me that the police
don't do anything, they're just there to keep the order and
stop people enjoying it. They do, they stop people enjoying it.
Like yeserday, all I saw was bits of blue and red and then a
big black thing in front of it. There was black every so often,
because he was walking really slowly, purposefully. They do,
 they smirk at you all the time when you're at the match, look
 at you like you're nothing.




End of interview




                         t
          DOCKLANDS HISTORY PROJECT    HILLSBOROUGH TESTIMONY



I       Your name?



I       Your address?



I       Your date of birth?



I       What is your occupation?



I       Did you have a ticket for the match?

        Yes, I did.

I       Where was this for?

    • B Gate. Leppings Lane end. On the terraces.

I       What time did you leave Liverpool?

        About quarter-to-ten.

I       How did you travel to Sheffield?

     My mate,           hired a car and we all went in the car.
That's                  HI work mate and his son, me,        |
brother                        himself.

I       What route did you take.

        The M5 route.

I       Why did you take that route?

ZD   I don'-t know. It was last minute arrangements.       rang
me at eight o'clock in the morning, I didn't know what route we
were going to take, I was just driven there.

I       It was a last minute arrangement that you got the ticket?

    I   Yes.



                          \
                                                                                     *




                   Do you often go to football matches?

                   Not very often, no.

                   What sort of a journey did you have?

                   Quite a good journey, we had a laugh         andeverything.

                   Were there any hold ups?

                   NO.

                   Did you stop at all?

                   No, just drove straight there.

I                  Where did you park when you got to Sheffield?

   | Roughly, about a mile away from the main gate, Leppings
Lane.
    I              Did you see any police officers where you parked?

         No. All the pubs were boarded up and
            Ll V   •    f l JbJk        ^ w   "   ~
                                                                allthe shops were
                                  ct-aHi 11m _
_




    closedJ on J
               -U vAitfo
               the route +
                         *r\ fViD
                         to  the stadium.

    I                  What time did you get to Sheffield.

                       About half-eleven, something like that.

                       Did you go directly to the ground?

                       No. We went for a drink first.

                       Where did you go for a drink?

         A pub called the                             I Don't ask me where that is
    because I haven't a clue.

    I                   Were there any other football supporters there?

         Yes, some Forest supporters were there, theywere having a
    drink in there, four or five of them, I think.

    I                         Were you the only Liverpool supporters?

    [ZD   No, some came later on. As we were about toleave, some
    came then.-

        I              What was the atmosphere like?

    ---- 1 Friendly. We were just having a
    |                                                      drink,laughing and
     joking.
                                                                                                 I




        Did you have any contact with the Forest supporters?
          1

        Not much. They never said anything.

        Were there locals there?

     Oh, there were locals there as well, yes.                                      was having
          7    .   -   -   1   .       _   _   • _____   A   *   _______ -      I       I
^ go on the video machine, answering questions and                                       won
six pound on it.

I       How old is         I, the boy with you?

        About ten I think.

        How much did you have to drink?

        Three pints.

        When did you leave?

        It must have been about two o'clockish.

I       Were there other supporters still there when you left?

            said we had to leave early anyway,                               to get a place
by the stadium so we could get in handy.

I    You say there were other Liverpool supporters there when
you left. About how many?

        Three or four,     that's all, not many.

         Did you have any contact with them?

         No.

         What was their mood when you left?

         Happy. Everyone was happy all laughing and joking and
    everything

    I    Did the whole group of you leave together?

         Yes.

    I    What did you so next?

         Well,-we drove towards the stadium. Everywhere was
    barriered off so we had to park quit a distance away from the
    stadium.

    I     How long did it take you to find a parking space.




                                   3
                                                                  I




     Well, there was quite a bit of traffic by the time we got,
it must have been about ten minutes or so upon reaching the
place where the ground was.

I   Were there any police directing you at that time?

□    No.
There were police there, but not saying particularly where you
should park. They weren t stopping every car or anything like
that.

I   What did you do when you got out of the car?

     Just walked straight to the stadium.

     How long did it take to get to the stadium?

     It was quite a good walk. Quarter-of-an-hour, perhaps
more. As we were going to the stadium, we all made arrangements
on the w ay down there for all of us to meet outside the
       , which is not far from the car. As we were on our way
down there, the crowds started to c ome then and apparently,
just before they strated to go in, 1       made arrangements
with      D t0 meet him by the shop. But I never heard that
because I was still further back with the crowd. They got a bit
ahead of me.

I    Did you see any police officers on your way to the ground?

     Only a few.

I    What were they doing?

     I didn't take much notice. I saw the two policemen on
horseback. They were just riding round.

I    "Were you able easily to find the entrance to that part of
the ground you had a ticket for?

     No. Because when I got to the ground four policemen closed
the main gate by the turnstiles.

I    What time did you arrive there then?

     Aproximately half-two.

I    What was happening when you got there?

     Well, I got separated from the other three in the crowd.
So, by the time it was my turn to get in the gate, that's when
the police closed the main gate and wouldn't allow anyone
through the turnstiles.

I    How far from the turnstiles were you when that happened?




                              H-
        I was near the front of the queue, in fact, right by the
gate.

        You say 'the queue', was it a proper queue?

        Oh aye. There was a big queue. Masses of people behind me.

        An orderly queue for the turnstiles?

        Yes. Orderly.

        Was there any crushing at that time.

     Yes, they were crushing up against the gate. Perhaps
because I was right on top of the gate, people were right
behind me. Because, they actually closed the gate as I got to
it. They were actually closing the gate.

I       Which gate was this?

     The main gate which cornered the turnstiles off. As we
were going in the gate with the crowd, the police closed the
gate on us, wouldn? t allow us in. So that's how I got crushed
because I was right up by the gate.

I    Up until then there were orderly queues outside? How were
they ordered? Was someone directing people into queues?

     Well I didn't see anybody, no. We were just walking in as
normal as you'd walk into any match.

 I      Did you feel then that there was any sense of panic?

      Not then. no. Only when they actually closed the gate on
 my „— -- Obviously,
    face. --------, , -I was crushed then because no-one was
 expecting the gates to be closed, at that minute. And then
 there were lads climbing up the fence and into the gated area
 to get into the turnstiles and the police were letting them.
 This bloke next to me, smacked some fella. He said.'Get down
 from there.' and smacked him. He said, 'If you don t get down,
 they won't let us in.'

 I       Were there any police around you then?

         I only saw the four policemen by the gate.

         Did they say anything before they closed the gate?

      No. They didn't say why they were closing the gate. There
 was all shouting but they never said anything.

    I    So what happened then?
                                                                     *




     Some lads were shouting at the policeman who was on
horseback and he was shouting back at them.

I       What were they shouting.

DC   I couldn't hear properly because there were people
shouting behind m£ head as well. All shouting at the coppers
not opening the gates, I couldn't hear what was said, I could
just see they were shouting at each other, that's all.
Then, this policeman on horseback said, 'The side gates open,
lads. Go round the side gate.'

I       Did you hear him say that.

    J   Yse, I heard him say that.

I       Was there much confusion outside?

     Well there was, because everyone was shouting, wanting to
get in. 'Why are the gates closed?' or words to that effect.

I       Didyou feel crushed then?

|  |
   Yes, well   as I was walking in the gates, theyclosed    the
gates on me. I was crushed right up against the gates then.

I       And   there were a lot of people behind you?

        There must have been a few hundred people behind me, maybe
more.

I       Were people panicking at that stage.

        No, not really, no.

I       What were your feelings at that time?

   I I'm not going to get in, they've locked us out. That's it,
I'll be going home.

I       Did you feel angry or anything.

  | I was narked because I couldn't get in. But what can you
do if you're locked out? That's what I was thinking at that '
time

I    You heard the policeman say there was a gate open round
the side. You could hear his voice above the rest of the crowd.

     Yes. It was jsut that I was in earshot, perhaps. I presume
quite a few heard it because that's when the whole crowd surged
forward to go to the gate.

I       Which way did they surge?
                It must have been to the right a bit.

                What happened to you.

     I was taken along with the crowd. It was quite a distance
away from the main gate to the side entrance. That's the way we
all surged with the crowd.

I               Did you have time to think about going anywhere?

     Well no, he just said 'Side gate open' so, naturally
everyone makes for it. If there's a way you re going to get
in... you've got your ticket so you're going to go in.

I               How did you feel at the time?

     I felt O.K. You just think toyourself, .'Oh good,there's
a way we can get in. We're not all going to be locked out.
I went with the crowd. I think it was to the right. The main
gate was here (he indicates in front of him) and you go around
to the right and then you go forward.

I   What was happening around you?                                                          What was themood of                        the
people at that time?

     There was a lot of shouting—                    _
Everyone sort of rushed forward through the gate and in through
the tunnel. The tunnel was one of the worst parts, because
that's when the crush was starting, going through the tunnel.
You had to keep on your feet to keep going, because there were
thousands behind you. That was pretty nervewrecking, going
through the tunnel, by itself.

    I           Were you frightened then?

         A bit. Because obviously, if there's loads of people
                                                 •                                  i             !                      n       r t
    behind you then you've got to keep up w i t h t h e people in
    front... I was a bit nervewracked because it was pitch black, 1
    couldn't see as we were going through it.

                 What could you see.
         Nothing really. It was pitch black. You couldn t even see
    people... you were taken forward with the crowd. I didn t like
    going through that tunnel at all.

        I        What could you see from the tunne, ahead?

    I       IWell, when you
                 yy ^   j
                        •   got near to the end of it you could see the
                            W L 1 C LI   v   U       g   v   w   l i        ^                              ^
                        *
                        '                                         . i   «       1       I     *       J_       D   l l       f         f
        light and you naturally think you're in the ground. But the
        worst part was the impact when you left the tunnel to hit^tne
        people that were in there. The whole crush was then. That s
        when, there was like the force into the other people. That
        really shook me up. You hit the people and that s when you all
became squashed then, as soon as you hit the people that were
there. And we were all swung over... I was swung over to the
right and I was crushed up with my arms by my sides, my hands
up here, (he demonstrates his arms pinioned at his sides but
bent at the elbows so that his hands were to the sides of his
chest.) holding my glasses case. I was terrified of losing my
glasses... And the steps leading down to each barrier, with all
the crushing and pushing, we were going down three steps and
coming back three steps. And then we were getting pushed
forward each time because more people must have kept coming in
then.

I    What did you think was happening?

     I was frightened because, it was that hot and jammed and
packed in there, the sweat poured off me and you could smell
the sweat of everybody else that was in there as well. The
place stunk of sweat.

I    What was happening to the people around you?

     I was aware that everyone was suffocating then because...
even I was suffocating at parts. Because,  obviously, the more
people that got in there, the less room there was for anyone to
move. I couldn't catch my breath half the time. As I say, we
were walking down three steps and back three steps and I
suppose that that give you the little bit of leeway to breathe.
There were certain points where you stood still and you were
jammed together then. It's very hard to describe, because a lot
of things happened so fast. And then, presumably, more people
kept coming in and I was pushed further forward. I presume
everybody else was pushed further forward then. And then, there
was an almighty push altogether and I hit the barrier then. I
was bent right over the barrier with the force of other people
on top of me.

I    The crash barrier was this?

     Yes. I hit the barrier that hard, it knocked the wind
right out of me and I was bent over double. I collected my
thoughts very quick and I got hold of the barrier and pushed
myself back... pushed some people away.

I    How long were you on the barrier?

     A few minutes. It felt like ages, a few minutes. But
that's when I was in a right state because I hit this barrier.
I didn't think I was going to get off it. Because people were
crushing on top of you then. So when I pushed myself off the
barrier, obviously, I pushed the people back to give me a bit
of room to breath for a second. I was so out of breath, it took
me seconds to recatch my breath. I decided... if I stay where I
am I'm going to get further crushed down again. So, the obvious
thought was, 'I better get back amongst the crushers.' not go
further down and get crushed more. I could hear people
screaming and crying and I could hear people saying, 'You're
standing on some kid.' all that... I could just hear the
screaming, lots of screaming.

I       What were your thoughts at that time?

      I was panic-stricken. I'm not going to get out of this. I
was really worried. I said, 'I'm b e t t e r o f f getting b a c k u p the
crowd, to see if I can get out.' I was in a state of panic, I d
better get out of this place or otherwise I'M going to get
injured.' Because as I hit the barrier, naturally I thought I
was going to get worse injuries. So I decided to crawl through
everybody's   legs, which I did. I was facing the barrier then,
turned round and went through people's legs. Because the
terraces were on a slope, so all people's legs are on different
tiers, naturally, you think there is a space in between people.
That's why I thought very quick, that if I stayed where I was,
 even though I'd got off the barrier, I was going to go further
down again and get crushed further. The best thing to do was to
 get back.
I       How easy was that? You went down onto your knees..?

     No. Not onto my knees. I more or less knelt down and then,
that way... sort of pushed myself forward.

I       Through people's legs?

        Through people's legs, yes. I was in a crouching position.

        What was happening around you then?

      I could hear all shouting and everything. THe match was
 going on - I couldn't see the match obviously - I know the
 match was on, people were shouting I heard the crowd was a l l (
 shouting and everything. But as I was running through people s
 legs and pushing to get back up, lots of other lads followed me
 as well. So they must have been trying to get out as well.

    I    How did you know that?

         Because they were right behind me. I think even a few ran
    out in front of me as well. Once I started they must have
    followed suit sort of thing. See one do it and they all do it.
    I come to a barrier again, it must have been near the top of
    the place and I had to crawl right under the barrier and get to
    the top then. It actually had become—    the situation wasn t as
    crushed as you made your way further back, It was tough going
    at first, to get through the first... God knows how many rows
    of people before it became slightly easier.

    I    Where did you come out?
  , 1 came out at the top, which I thought was the tunnel
  trance, as I looked up I could see an archway, naturally, I
thought that was the tunnel entrance, the way I come in. I was
trying to get out. I was really panicking then, to get out. And
when I got there, this bloke said, 'That s as far as you go
mate. It s the wall here.' And then, I went 'Oh shit.' This
bloke was laughing. And all the kids that were behind me said
 F in... gonna get out of here, let's get up.' I could hear
lads shouting.  Give us a hand up.' so all the people at the
back were saying,  E y re, bunk them up.' And so I bunked them
up then.

I    These were the lads coming out from between people's legs.
As they were coming out, you were, with other men, bunking them
up to people hanging down.

     I 8S ’t      at the very back there no crushing. It wasn'1
as bad. We didn t know what was going on further down so those
lads had a bit more room at the back.

I             How many people were handed up?

     God knows... loads... too numerous to count. The lads were
hanging over the stands and held their hands down and as we
were bunking them up they were grabbing hold of the people's
hands and we were pushing them up.

I             What was happening in the                           crowd around you at that time?

□ □   Everyone was helping to hand them up. They were all
 saying, We want to get out.' All the kids wanted to get out. I
 didn t think anything was wrong then, I just thought, they want
 to go up in the stands out the way.

I    So you didn t realise that anything was wrong at that
point?

   , N°> only except  that there was a load of crushing and you
couldn t breath. I was frightened because I was getting crushed
a lot. You see, as I went down, when I hit the barrier, there
was young lads next to me then who were falling, I helped this
young lad next to me, but I never seen that lad again because I
got pushed further on then, before I hit the barrier.

I             So there were people falling over then?

              Ye s .

I    The kids that were asking to be lifted up, were they
panicking?

—    Oh yes, you could see panic in their faces. I was
    -------       -    '   *   '        c   -------------------    —   ^   — •*-   j.   y y a o

shattered but I was still lifting them up. I was obviously in a



                                   \o
state of panic then, not realising what was going on anyway,
myself..

I    You weren't really aware of what was happening?

     No.

I    How long were you there at the back?

     It must have been ages.

I    Were you handing people up all the time?

     All the time, yes.

I    Were you aware at all of what was happening at the front?

     No, but when we were handing people up, we saw the fans
from the stands ripping the boards from the stands. I was
shouting, 'What are you doing that for?' I didn't realise they
were going to be used as stretchers for the dead. I was
shouting at them for ripping the things off because they were
dropping right by our heads.

I    What happened to those boards then?

     They were just getting handed down through the crowd. I
could hear screaming and everything. It was like bedlam really.
It was too hard to comprehend what was going on. Because I was
still shaking after I hit that barrier, that shook the life out
of me.

I    When did things start to calm   down, or did they?

     Not really, things just calmed down when the area was
cleared.

I    How was it cleared?

     I don't know. I couldn't see. I was still helping people
and the next minute I knew, the place was a little more
clearer. That's when I saw the bodies on the floor and I was
sick then. I felt really sick then, when I saw the bodies on
the floor. I said to this bloke next to us, 'Don't tell me
there's people dead.' He said, 'Yes, I tried to help before,
some young lad, tried to give this young lad the kiss of life,
but the coppper said to me, "Leave him, he's dead.'" I don't
know where- that bloke came from, I must have been in a state
of... God knows.... of shock of some sort... I just didn't
realise what was going on, even then. When it cleared, I just
saw fellas dropping to the floor and sitting on the floor just
crying their eyes out. I was slumped over the barrier then,
there was a barrier nearby, after I finished hand- balling all
the lads up, I was just slumped over the barrier, I was



                           \V
exhausted, I was really out of breath. When I spoke to that
bloke, I' said to him, 'There's all dead people    ' I just
couldn't believe that there'd be dead people there, I just
couldn't believe it. When I seen all the lads with coats
over... I said, 'What are they doing with coats over their
heads?' I just couldn't believe it. And the bloke that was next
to me said to me, 'I was helping a young lad and the police
said "Leave him. He's dead."1 It was just hard to comprehend.
And I was speaking to one Forest fan, an older bloke, I can't
remember what the hell he said, I just can't remember what he
said at all. I must have been in more a state of shock than I
thought. Even now, I feel sick talking about it... I just felt
breathless and exhausted.

I      How long were you over the barrier?

       When the crowd cleared? I don't know how long I was there
for.

I    Did anybody help you off or were you able to get off
yourself?

  I I had to get off myself. I don't know how long I was
there. I must have been there over half an hour, it may have
been longer. I was just physically and totally exhausted.

I      What was happening around you then?

     People shouting and screaming and crying. People sitting
on the floor crying their eyes out, I seen loads of dead
bodies. And you could see them all walking round the pitch. I
could see then. I saw where the    perimeter fencehad been ripped
apart. One photographer got in,    whether it was a cameraman or a
photographer, I don't know, but    about twenty ofthefans rushed
him and battered him. I saw that.

I      What happened then?

     Well, the police came up and they were trying to shift the
bodies and some of the fans were shouting at the police. I
couldn't make out what they were shouting, they were just
shouting and swearing, you know. I just couldn't make out. I
couldn't realise what was going on it was funny... It really
took it out of me. God knows how long I was there and then this
bloke came round with a mop bucket full of water and a load of
paper cups. I had a drink of water and I felt a bit better
after a drink of water. I must have been really shattered, I
couldn't stand up, I must have leaned on that barrier     God
knows how long.

I      Did you speak to anyone again?

     I don't think so. You see, when I saw all that, I just
wanted to get out of the place. When it fianlly registered,
what had happened, that there were dead bodies there. I just
wanted to get out. I felt really exhausted, I couldn t hardly
stand, it took me all my energy just to find my way out.

I       Did you go back up the tunnel?

        Back up the tunnel yes.

I       Was there anybody helping people there oraround you?

| | I didn't see anyone. There was an announcement... that's
right, Kenny Dalglish came on before the area cleared, he
appealed for people to be calm and co-operate with the.police.
That's when it cleared, when I was still over the barrier.

I    So you found the tunnel you came in by and is that the way
you went out?

     Yes and I went to the toilet then. Fellers were talking
about it in the toilet. Some were saying that here was five
dead. I heard there was five dead and then I heard some lad
say, 'No, I heard there was seven dead.' And then others were
saying, as I was going out, because the crowd was walking out
then, some had radios and I heard them saying there was fifteen
dead. It just seemed to jump like that I even heard in the
ground, when I was there, there was five dead and some saying
there were seven. But when I got out of the ground completely,
altogether, the police were there ushering uson, 'Come on.
This way.' They were directing us out then.

I       What did you see outside      the ground when   you came   out?

     I saw a lot of coppers sitting in vans eating food. And
there was still a policeman on horseback there and there was
plenty of coppers directing us which way to go. We had to go
round in a half circle before we got to the main road.

 I       Did   you speak to anyone?

     No, I hardly spoke to anyone at all. I had difficulty
walking, really. My body felt heavy. I just felt really
shattered. I managed to get to the main road and made my way
back up to the               I I must have waited there for
ages. I stood outside. And there were peple crying, walking up
the road and everything. You could hear them all talking, but
it seemed like, miles away, it didn't register at all.

    I   How long were you outside that pub?

         God knows. It felt like ages. I saw people... the train
    stopped, there was this bridge there, the train stopped and
    there was some steps down. I could see people waiting at the
    station and they were meeting up with each other and putting
    their arms around each other and everything. People who had
probably lost each other in the crowd and meeting up there
People crying and everything.. I could see all that.

                    When did your friends find you.

                found me. He was on h is own then, and I said,
 W he r e 's      n How's                  -. _    ?.          >
1 aH n ten was crushed.---------------    1* ' I said. I heard a young
                           or trampled, probably dead. He said that
         was panic-stricken as well, he couldn't f i n d I at
al 1 T"1111"    found him in the end. He said, 'Everyone1s alright,
             alright, I m alright.'

                    So you were relieved to see each other?

       Yes. He said,  I thought we arranged to meet you by the
shop.    I said, What shop? You never told me about any shop. We
made arrangements to all meet here on the way down to the:
ground.    He said, 'We've been looking for you for ages.'
was worried, he said,    I thought you were in amongst the dead.'
Whfiiiv/e all eventually got together and we got in the car,
        was in a state because he was telling me he couldn't find
         He said he was squashed up against the fence, the
perimeter fence.

I                   How were you feeling on the way home?

     X was just sick, terrible. And X must have looked an all
because the others were very quiet as well. Everyone seemed to
be very quiet.And we said, we'd better find a phone, but all
the phones were crowded, there was no wav vnn rrmid get to a
r \ n   r t w   «     A m /4                    1   *   *
phone. And we listened to the radio i       n        auu the
                                                 car and tne
next we heard there was 85 dead. We just couldn't believe that
many were dead. We just couldn't believe it. But         Was
saying,  I thought you were going to collapse, because when we
were in the Isle of White...  we went to see Bob Dylan one time
and I flaked out in the crowd. X think he was really worried.
He said,  I got you the ticket and you could have been dead.'
Because he could see everything from the stands but there was
nothing he could do. He just felt helpless.

I    Did you at any time after arriving in Sheffield, witness
any violence: within groups of Liverpool supporters?

     No. Only to the point that when we were locked out at the
main gate, and these lads were climbing over and this big lad
got annoyed because, you'd think they'd lock us out, so he just
smacked that lad there. But that was the only trouble I saw.

I                   Between rival supporters?

                    None at all.

I    Against any individuals, apart from that incident that
you ve mentioned?


                                        IH:
    No.

I   Against any police officers?

     Only that one on the police on horseback. He was just
shouting because he couldn t get in, that's all, shouting at
the copper.

I    And the incident that you mentioned against the press or
media?

     Yes. I saw that.

I   Did you see anyone who appeared to be drunk?

     Not in my opinion. There was no way you could survie if
you were drunk. If you surged forward at that speed and that
many people, you'd never make it in the ground. You couldn't
keep your legs together.

I    Is there anything you want to add to what you've already
said?

     Only that... You see, my way of thinking was that the
place was like the Kop, I didn't think the area was that much
enclosed,you know, railed off and the perimeter fence joining
the railings. I thought it was like the Kop where there's a gap
between the end of the steps, the terrace itself, and then
there's a path right round which can lead to any sections of
the ground anywhere. It didn't occur... I could have made a
fatal decision to go forward, thinking that there was a way
out, that you could go to a different section. If I didn't make
the decision to go back instead of forward, I could have been
one of the dead. That *s stuck in my mind the most. I just thank
God that I made the right decision to go through people's legs
and go back.

I    You'd never been to that ground before?

     No.

I    Your assumption would be that it was like the Liverpool
ground.

ZZI   Yes. You'd naturally think that there was a path, an area
around where you could walk to different sections of the ground
before you came to the perimeter fence. I just think that if I
decided to~go forward, instead of backwards to get out, then I
would have been one of the dead. Because the barrier I crashed
into, was the barrier before the one that was demolished by the
crowd. That was a sickening thought as well, that could have
happened to me. The most sickening thought was, the force I hit
 that barrier, I thought I ,was going to cut in two. I actually
 screamed with pain. How I got off there, I can only presume...
that when I put my hands on the barrier and pushed the peopl
away, that's the only reason... But I was really pinned up
against that barrier. How I got off must have been a miracle




End of Interview
                   DOCKLANDS HISTORY PROJECT - HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER




     My full name is                         I live at


     Are you employed?

     I am a student in Social Work, I am at college currently two days a
     week, and on placement at                           three days a week.
     And your course is?

     Social Worker.    It is a C.Q.S.W. Certificate of Qualifications in Social
     Work.    A two year course.
     And that is through Liverpool University?
     Yes.

     Did you have a ticket for the match?
     I did.

     Where was this for?

     It was for the Leppings Lane terracing.        It cost me six pounds I paid
     face value for it, I haven't got the ticket with me I wish I had, ‘
     I have still got it at home so that will denote exactly where in terms
     of pen, alley whatever.       That will be   on there.
     What time did you leave Liverpool?

     It was half past nine in the morning,how I know          that isbecause   we were
     supposed to be leaving at half eight,        Iwas picking up the     lift at the

              which is at the beginning of the motorway, there was a van you see
     a group of lads of about twelve in the van and they were an hour late
     so it was half past nine when we left Liverpool.
I.   What route did you take to Sheffield?

     TO be honest I don't know too much about that,         I don't drive myself, two
     lads shared the driving, one drove there and one drove back.          The van
     didn't have any windows in so we couldn't see outside.          All I know was
     that it was a pretty easy passage, I believe a lot of people had problems
     with the congestion on the motorway and getting to the game.          We seemed
     to get there fairly quick.
                                                  - 2 -
 ___          Xt was suprising in fact I am sure we got into Yorkshire in about two
             hours or so.

I.           Did you go straight to Sheffield or did you stop on the way?

             We stopped in Rotherham, we went to a pub there to stretch our          legs.
I.           How much did you have to drink there?

A.M.         At that pub I had say two pints, and when we got to Sheffield wewent
             to another pub and had three pints so I had about five altogether.
I.           Were you delayed in any way during your journey?

             No.     Other than the stop we actually made ourselves     to stretch our legs, no.
I.           What time did you arrive in Sheffield?

I        1   We would have Sot there about a quarter to two or ten to two. These times
             are, sorry to be vague, but the thing is that you don't think anything
             has gone on, if you knew that something was about to happen then you would
             mark all this down in your memory.      I can only speak approximately.
I.           You were wearing a watch?

             Yes, I had a watch on I would say it wasapproximately           a quarter to or
             ten to two.

I.           Where in Sheffield did your journey end?

             We parked the van outside anewsagents about a ten minute walk from the ground.
I.           Did you go straight to the ground then?

             No we went to a local pub, can't remember the name, there was crowds outside
             the pub as well as inside.

I*           So there were a lot of other football supporters at the club were         there?
     I       Yes there was.
I.           Where were they from?

I
-----^       They were m°stly Liverpool supports, in fact to be honest I never         saw a
             Nottingham Forest fan in that pub.     I think the thing is that they arrive
             from a different motorway and they go to the pubs it that end and we
             ended up at the other end.
I.           What was the atmosphere like?

ZD           The atmosphere was very good,    therewasa lot     of singing    and highspirited.
             That is typical of any semi-final day out.       I went to the cup final last
             year and it was pretty much the same.
I.           How much did you have to drink?

ZZ           In that pub I had about three pints, so in total I must have had five pints.
I.           When did you leave the pub?

             I left the pub at about twenty five to three something like that.          Our aim
             was, we thought there would be a lot of forged tickets about so we thought
             get there late so they can sort them all out and then there would be easy
             access into the ground.     This was a problem that happened at Wembley in
             1986.    There were a lot of forgeries and the queues were so big because of
             that.
                                                   - 3 -
      .    And it wasn't until you got them out of the queues, they had a copper
           at each turnstile, that you had easy access into the ground.
I.        Were there other supporters in the pub when        youleft?

           Yes there was> but everyone was sort of drinking       up and heading for the
          ground.
I.        What was the mood then?

          Again high spirited singing football songs.
I.        Did you take any cans or bottles of alcholol away with you?
Z Z       No not from    the pub.
I.        How many of    you left together?

      I   Three of us left together, I didn't actually know the others I only knew
          two of them in the van itself.        We decided to leave, some of the others
          had left before us out of the group, as I said there were twelve altogether,
          some left after us.
I.        What did you do next?

          We Just made our way to the ground really.
I.        Did you see    any police officers    on your wayto theground?

          No*       actually took a route, this issomething that         the police officers
          from the West Midlands force did with me they showed me a map of the
          surrounding areas of the ground and they were trying to determine the
          route by which I got to the ground on foot.        Again it was a bit vague but
          I do remember going through a big park not far from the ground.            I remember
          seeing a river close by as well so we cut through the park.
I.        Were you able easily to find that entrance to the part of the ground you
          had a ticket for?

          No that was the problem, as I got there, in fact we lost one of my mates
          so there was just the two of us,       outside the ground,     I said to this   lad
          "There's going    to be trouble,"     I din't mean people dying but I could see
          that it was so close to the kick-off and there was a lot of people who
          weren't in the    ground.   They    all had tickets as far as I could see, I had
          a ticket and I    thought there     was going to be trouble.    Anyway I asked the
          policeman, this is one of the things why I phoned the enquiry line, I
          asked a policeman and I showed him my ticket and asked where we should be
          standing, what queue whatever.       I couldn't actually see an orderly queue
          at all.    This policemand was actually on foot.      I saw about three or four
          on horseback, obviously it was harder to ask them.           Anyway he directed us
          to what seemed like a queue in the end it turned out that it was the wrong
          place we should have been standing, so I came out and asked another policeman
          on foot saying that we had been mis-directed so blah blah blah where are we
          exactly supposed to be.
                                       -   4 -
 So I showed him my ticket again, but he actually didn't open his mouth he
 just made a waving motion with his hand in the approximate direction of
 where the gate was so we thought let's go there.           I don't know whether he
 was treating us with contempt because you are football fans or it is just
 because you are from Liverpool, but that does happen.           A lot of away
 games I have been to policemen can obviously be a bit contemptuous of us
 just by virtue of the fact of where you come from, or whether he tought
 he'd lost control and had had enough.           Anyway we eventually found the
 gate ourselves.

 What time did you arrive at the ground?

 We got to the ground at about ten to three, something like that.           This is
what I was so suprised at that there was this build up outside.            We had
gone with the object of missing all of that, the problem with people
were people had forged tickets, we knew because the Chairman of Liverpool
Football Club had warned the F.A. that the demand for tickets from the
Liverpool fans would be extremely     high.       Therefore it was ironic that
there was less allocation.       So we thought that there would be a lot of
problems.

Did you know what time it was when you got there?

At the ground, as I said I can only say roughly that it was ten to three but
I know that I got in just after the kick off because the game had already
kicked off, what with all the problems outside it was hard getting in.
At one point I remember we here herded together with a police horse just
keeping us all back and the police horse was just actually beginning to
kick a little bit with it's back legs and we were standing right by it.
We got in just after the kick off.

While you   were still outside   what was the scene like, what was happening?
A lot of people we I suppose      they were saying to the police "Look I've
got a ticket, literally saying "I've got a ticket."           They were probably
shouting at the police really saying "I've got a ticket and I am not getting
in the ground, what's going on?"      There was no violence towards the police
from what I could see and there was no fighting amongst the fans.           '
Were you still with your friends?

As I said-I lost one but I was still with another one, we left in a group
of three and one of them we lost outside because of the crowd but I was
still with one of them.

What were your feelings at this time?
                                                -    5 -
Z Z        I would say I was a bit worried          because we had lost my friend for one
           but not worried for any major reason just worrying about meeting up later
           to go back to the van.       As I say I was just O.K.     I had been a bit
           concerned about the build up of the crowd but didn't think anything untoward
           would happen at that stage, just thought it was a bit of a problem that would
           be sorted out.
I.        Was   there a queue?

      .   Outside the ground?      There was no orderly queues that Ican       describe it was
           literally a mass of people congregating, there were some attempts at
          forming queues but they quickly deteriorated.

I*        Wasthe police who were          attempting to form queued
          Not   really the fanswere just grouping aournd turnstilesthemselves.
          I saw three or four on horseback and spoke to two on foot, I didn't
          see much more of a police presence, but after saying that with being on
          ground level in a crowd there is obviously a lot that you can't see.
          Maybe there were policemen probably a hundred or fifty yards away from
          me but I wasn't aware of that.

I.        Was it clear where the entrance to the section of ground you had a ticket
          for was?   How did you find this?

          It wasn't clear I suppose because I felt as though I had to ask a copper
          firstly where we should have been and there was a lot of confusion, in
          fact there was even people saying to me "Do you know where we are supposed
          to be going mate,"     I said "Look I am in the same position."         To be honest
          I can't remember what the heading was over the turnstiles.           All I know was
          that it wasn't so clear or I would have looked at it and known myself
          right away, but I suppose the added confusion with the crowds I           felt I had
          to ask a policeman to be sure where I should have been.
          Did you find the correct turnstile you were to enter in the end?
          Eventually we did, we went through the correct turnstile, officially
          as well, I say officially as I presented my ticket and the counterfoil
          was ripped off.    Another reason for saying this is that the friend that
          we actually lost I know that he went through a gate thatwas opened he
          told me later    on when we        met up with him again.
          What were the police officers doing         outside the ground?
          Well a couple on foot were just standing there I suppose          theywere... the
          idea was that    they would        be available there forany         information if youwan
          it.   A poilce   horse as I        said was trying to penthe         fansin and     hold them
          back for a bit at one point.      That was a single police horse attempting that.
                                            -   6 -
         That's all they could do at the match really attempt at one point to
         try and get fans into an orderly fashion.     That wasn't really happening
         they weren't succeeding anyway.    This build up of fans outside I k n o w •
         from other people, had been going on as early as two o'clock.
         About how many people were there outside?

         You are talking thousands rather than hundres.     I am not really good at
         estimating crowds but to be on the safe side I would say three thousand
         at least.
I.
         How long were you outside there before you entered the ground?
         It must have   been say about ten or   twelve minutes becausewegotthere        at
         ten to three   and got in just after   the kick off, sowe got in two orthree
         minutes after the kick off.   The game was in progress for a little bit
      you see as I      got in, until it was abandoned.
      Were all the      turnstiles open?
      As far as I could see yes.

      Do you actually know now which one you entered by?
     No I don't to be honest.
     You would need your ticket still for that?
     Yes to show that.
     Were you searched at all?
     No not at all.

     But your ticket was torn off?
     Officially the counterfoil was turn off.
     Were there any police officers inside the ground?

     There was none on the terracing that I could see myself , there was none
     on the terracing but there were some that werea bit away from the touch
     line near the fences, I could see a few there.
I.   But were there any just inside the turnstiles as you got through?
     No I didn't see any no.

     Were there any stewards inside the ground?

     No not as you immediately went through the turnstiles because I remember
     that for a fact, because how we found our way onto the terracing, I remember
     getting through and we went through a dark tunnel and you could see the
     goal which Liverpool was defending at at that stage you could see the back
     of the goal.       I though the goal was directly in front of that tunnel but
     according to the West Midlands police it is slightly off centre and to the
     left,     but anyway it was roughly it seemed to me that the goal was right
     m     front and that is how people just headed for the goal.      Then when I got
     out of the tunnel on the opening where the terracing was I decided to go
     left with my friend so we went to the left of the goal again and stood
     on the terracing about mid-terracing not right at the front about mid-terracing.
                                     - 7 -
Were you directed to your section at all?
No we found our own way.
What was happening inside the ground?

When I got in I noticed that a lot of people had already spilt onto the •
pitch, and I didn't think anything major was happening.        I thought there
was a bit of a problem where there was too many in and that they would soon
solve that.   I couldn't be sure at that stage, which is what I thought at
that stage,that there was a hooligan element present thathad        invaded the
pitch and I was quite sorry     to see that at the time.     Iwasthinking   about
the reputation of the fans.     Later on it turned out to be something quite
different.

Had you gone directly to the terrace you were on after getting through
the turnstile?

Yes we went straight through, we didn't look left or right to be honest,
we went through this dark tunnel and then straight onto the terracing,
as we got out of the tunnel     we then went to the left.
How did it take you roughly     to get from the turnstile?
That was the thing actually it was quite quick it too literally seconds,
twenty or thirty seconds walking through although there was a lot of people
there wasn't any major hold up.

You stood about half way up the terrace and about how many yards where on
the pitch were you to the left of the goal would you say?
I would say not very far away from the goal, if I was looking directly at
the goal to the left I would have been ten to twenty yards mid-terracing.
Would you say therefore opposite the edge of the penalty area or further
over towards the corner flag?

:<o, no in fact I was miles away from the corner flag, that was to the left
of me.   I was within the boundaries of the penalty areas as I looked onto
the pitch.

You were in the boundary of the penalty area?
Within the penalty area.

Were you within the area of the six yard area or just the penalty area?
±t's hard to remember that I could have possibly been within the boundary
of the six yard box but if not definitely within the boundary of the
eighteen yard box.
Who were you with at this time?

At this time I was with one friend, as I said we lost the other one.
He is just as little lad of seventeen, actually I was particularly worried
about him, in fact I had grabbed hold of him outside the ground dragging
him around because we had already lost one and I didn't want to lose another
person and with him being small I was particularly worried about him.
                                    -   8 -
 How did you feel when you reached your place on the terraces?
 At this stage you could describe my feelings as just being glad to be
 at a football game.   I noticed the problem about people getting onto
 the pitch but thought that this was going to be solved quickly.         I began
 to watch the game then really enjoying it.

 How had you decided which part of the terrace to go and stand on?
 To be honest I didn't have much choice.      As I got through the tunnel I
 was really to the extreme left anyway on the tunnel so to go to the
 right would have meant cutting across a lot of people which would cause
 a lot of hassle for them and for me also.     I really had no choice I just
went to the left standing on mid-terracing I wanted to get a reasonable
view.   It is normally where I stand on the terrace week-in week-out
 It is just a preferred position.
How full was the section you were in?

It was congested at this stage and I use the word congested because at
this stage I couldn't really say crush because at a normal football game
this is part and parcel of it, being in situation that had just been like
that but you consider that to be normal.      If you stand at the Kop at
Liverpool's ground then that is particularly bad especially at some games
especially the big ones.   So I have just described it as congested but
nothing out of the ordinary at that stage it was a bit soon.
What was happening around you as soon as you took up your place?
There was again just a lot of people swaying a little bit with the crowd
but everyone was just watching the game at this stage.      This might, sound
as though a long time is going but it must have only been literally minutes
because the game   was called off at six minutes past three, but to me
talking about it now so much happened in that short space of time.           I can
actually remember standing on the terrace and watching the game.         I
remember at some point Liverpool had come close to scoring one of the
players hit the bar and that caused a rush forward I seem to remember
and m   retrospect that couldn't have helped the situation for those at
the front of the terracing.

Were you aware of any police officers in the ground?

In the ground yes, but not specifically on the terraces.         I could see
a few down by the fence, infect a few had tried to march some of those
on the pitch back onto the terraces.

There were already some people already spilling over onto the pitch?
As soon as I got into the ground yest.

How many police officers did you see approximately?




                                                        ( 347)
                                       -   9 -
About say        I was    only looking at one specific           areaand        thiswas to the
right of the goal, there must have been          at least        one gate       open,I know
they weren't all open but there must have been for them few people to
get in because they weren't climbing over the fence, well a few of them
were but not all of them some of them were proceeding onto the pitch
by other means so there must have been a gate open although it was hard
to see.     I would say that there was about three or four policemen there
at that time.

You didn't speak to any policement?         There weren't any near you?
Not on the terracing itself, no.

Were you aware of any stewards in the ground at all?
None.     No stewards, I didn't see any.

I wonder if you can       describe in as much detail as you can what         happened
leading up to 3-06.

Leading up to 3-06 as      I said before, it was congested      but we realised
that it was getting a      bit too much, and at this stage      before the game
was called off a lot of people had started to be lifted into the stands
off the terracing.       Me and my friend had noticed this      and he suggested that
we did the same thing      because it was getting too packed down below.          I
literally did not want to climb-.into the stands with me being so big and
heavy I didn't think I would physically make it.            I suggested that I
lifted him up because he was a lot lighter but he said "No,"               he wanted
me to try it first and that if we didn't make it we would stay in the
crowd whatever.      So we tried and anyway I somehow got up, I was helped,
he was helping me up I was standing on his hand and then people dragged
me up into the stands and they did the same for him and helping a few
other people up.     When I was in the stands I noticed that a policeman
had rushed onto the pitch with the intention of going to the referee
to say abandon the game and even at this stage I thought it was just
a problem with pitch invasion or probably down to hooliganism although
I said it was getting too congested I just thought it would be something
that would not really cause major problemsl Just thought that if a few
people were allowed to climb into the stands it would release it down
below and'then they could sort something out.         I was very confused at
this stage wondering what the people on the pitch, were they getting
on the pitch because they were uncomfortable, but was it because there
was a hooligan element involved because you could see lads running onto
the pitch then in agitated states and of course it was hard to interpret
that on the spare of the moment, but in retrospect you know why it was.
                                    -   10 -
 Obviously they had seen people in great difficulties on the terracing
 and within minutes the game was called off of course, it wasn't long
 after that when I noticed the first person who was being resuscitated
 slightly to the left of the post, having seen that it was hard to
 take that in but then I looked further to the left and noticed four or
 five others were having the same thing done to them, and quickly it just
 became mayhem.    It was a mass scene of people being resuscitated and
 panic, fans helping to take boardings down for make-shift stretchers,
 to carry people off to get help or first aid treatment.

 Did you attempt to leave the ground before any announcement had been made
or did you stay?

No.   In fact we stayed, one of the problems was that we had to find my
other mate first we were obviously anxious about him.       Eventually we found
him and we stayed for a bit really because everybody else seemed to be
staying and a lot of people were saying "Stay it is important to stay and
witness what is going on type of thing."       Everyone found it important
really to    make sure... you knew then that there was no aspect of hooliganism
or problems with that and the supporters wanted to witness it so that they
had an account to give really, and didn't want facts to be         can't think
of the word... but you know the way the press are they play around with
the facts, they just wanted a true picture to be presented and as it turned
out it was important that a lot of fans have come forward because what
was written in the press was particularly         the only words to describe
them was evil I suppose because it was so far from reality of what actually
did go on.

So you met up with one of your friends up in the seats was this?
No what happened was the one we lost outside the ground he was on the
terracing longer than us and it was my other friend who spotted him
and we shouted to him and he came forward.... when I say came forward
it wasn't an easy process for him it was by protest by backward movements
and foreward movements and eventually he got to the top of the terracing
and we were able to lift him up into the stands.
Did you hear announcements on the tannoy at any time?       *

At first you could hear initially the tannoy saying "Would the -Liverpool
supporters please get back."' "Will you please co-operate with the police."
Which was ironic for the fans really because once that was announced on
the tannoy there was a lot of anger a big uplift and noise from the crowd
saying "What's going'Jon type of thing there's problems.     It was really
through a lack of co-operation with the police that the situation became
so bad, as I know from my own experiences outside the ground that I wasn't
really given much help by the police asto where I should have been.
                                     -    11 -
 What turnstile or what have you.        Later on the tannoy was just coming
 out with something but you couldn't distinguish what it was coming out
 with because there was so much noise, obviously there were people in
 highly emotional states and all that anger I suppose was present.
 What were your feelings at this time?

 Well I was particularly shocked really because it was the actual physical
 sight of seeing people being resuscitated that at a mundane occasion such
 as a football game it was hard to take in.       My mind was quickly working
 away and I knew that really I was saying to my mates "This has happened
 really because we should have had the other end which was the biggest
 end.   We should have had more allocation of tickets because we have
more fans type of thing and you could see the problems were due to the
 fact that some people, when those gates were opened, had got in without
tickets, a lot of people must have travelled without tickets although I
don ’t know anybody personally I presume that there must have been.
Did everyone that you travelled with have tickets to your knowledge?
Yes in fact that is an important thing I should have mentioned really that
just outside Sheffield we were stopped by the police        and the police said
how they wanted us to all produce our tickets and which we did, I presume
that if we didn't all have tickets then they might have turned us back,
I don't know what would have happened.
How long did you stay in the ground?

Until the announcement came over the tannoy that the game would be abandoned
everyone knew that anyway but for some reason everyone just stayed..         I
suppose you could look at it in a macabre kind of way and say that the
initial reaction would have been to leave because it was too much to
take m ,   that might have been approximately four o'clock, but whenever
that message came on the tannoy that was the exact time that we left.
Was it easy to get out?

Being congested there was a lot more people in the stands than there should
have been, with them climbing up.        This was one of my worries at the time
as well with a lot of people climbing into the stands I was worried that
the stand could have collapsed.     There was a possibility that it could have
been holding twice as many people as it was built for.        But anyway it didn't
collapse and we got out.    Not everyone left at the same time as me, people
in the seats were obviously waiting for it to clear before theyleft.
At the stands there is just a narrow row of steps going up in the middle
of certain grouping of seats, so you all had to go up virtually I wouldn't
say single file but the most you could get would be one or two walking abreast.
                                     -   12 -
 Well maybe two or three abreast walking up the steps so you all had to
 leave at different times.
 Did you see any police officers?
 Not in the stands no.
 Or on your way out?

 I saw a few on the way out.     I saw firemen, the police just outside the
 Leppings Lane turnstiles.     In fact we were going to ask them the way back
 to the van but decided not to we just made our own way back.
 Did you see any stewards on your way out?
 I didn't see any, no.

 As soon as you got outside the ground what did you do then?

Made our way back, we went the same route back we headed for the park
we had come across and we were looking for the van which we eventually
 found.

Did you see anyone who appeared to be drunk before the match?
No.   When you say 'appeared to be drunk'        I would say the kind of
drunkeness that would be manifested in high spirits, I mean singing football
songs and waving about, you see drunk could mean a lot of things, drunk
could mean violent people or whatever.          But ever football game there are
people drunk the same at that match that day only in the sense that there
was high spirits.

Did you see anyone who appeared to be drunk during the match while you
were on the terrace?

That would be harder to determine than outside the ground because in a
football crowd it is an atmosphere of general shouting and singing
and things, so what is normal behaviour for a drunken person is shouting
and singing doesn't necessarily mean that people at a football match are
drunk because they are singing it is just a normal thing to do again so I
wouldn't like to say.    You know for a fact, the pub was packed that I was
in and there were people outside it so there must have been a few people
who were drunk.

Did you see anyone appear to be drunk after the match?

No in fact everyone was in a pretty bad mood I suppose, very quiet and
panicking to try and reach a phone obviously to phone back home relatives
and that.

Did you see anyone arrested by the police at any time during the day?
I didn't see anyone arrested by them.

Did you at any time after arriving in Sheffield witness any violent acts
at all?
            .     This is something that the West Midlands police actually asked me
          and I didn't see any violence at all.     In fact it was great the atmosphere
          had been great, it had been such a great day up until then.     As I said
          the first pub we went to outside Sheffield we were talking to the locals
          and they literally warmed to us they enjoyed talking to us and literally
          having a laugh the way you do.     And in the second pub I was in it was just
          singing again all the football songs, no violence whatsoever.     It would
          have been strange to have seen violence anyway because there was mostly
          Liverpool fans.

I.        Did you see in Sheffield around the ground any violence between groups of
          rival supporters?     Any violence against any individuals including members
          of the public who were emergency services such as firemen or ambulance men?
          No none at all.
I.        Any violence against police officers?

Z Z       No none at all.     This is something that is important because on the news
          now despite what a lot of the press have said, on the news they actually
          spoke to a few publicans from the Sheffield area and there was one that
          said that there were some fans that were causing trouble but he later
          retracted it saying that the paper had made it up.     Actually he was on
          the television saying that they were great and there was a shopkeeper
          interviewed, I think it is important    that thoseviews should be taken into
          consideration for that police enquiry the shopkeepers, the publicans     who
          work around the Hillsborough Ground.

I.        Did you see any violence against any football supporters be them followers
          of Liverpool or Nottingham Forest?
          None at all no.

I.        Is there anything else you would like to add to what you have already
          said?

      •   -^es there is afew things   that I hoped to come out of the enquiry and one
          of them is an investigation to determine whether all those policemen who
          were on duty had had previous experience of the crowd itself.     Now I have
          heard nothing in the press to suggest that they have had no experience or
          whether they were from the Sheffield area even but I think that would have
          come out quickly in the press because it is an important factor but I am
          only saying it because of my own experience whereby I was directed to the
          wrong turnstile by one policeman, initially then the second policeman wasn't
          too helpful.    It was possible that he wasn't too sure either where we should
          have been but coming back and getting stories off friends and that there
          was even confusion on the stands with the seating turnstiles where to go and
          there wasn't much help there so I just wonder whether those policemen did
          have experience of the crowd itself which they ought to have had.
                                    -    14 -
The other thing is I have just mentioned about the opinions of shopkeepers
had been taken into consideration about the mood and behaviour of the
Liverpool supporters prior to the game and that is important. Having heard
a story from someone, and it is a friend of my mum's actually, this fella
didn't come away from Sheffield for two and a half days he was walking around
in shock.     Now what he had actually seen although there were no reports
of it in the press, not that I read anyway, apparently when an ambulance
came onto    the pitch to aid those who were injured or who had died, an
ambulance    actually ran over the head of a fella who was laid out dead on
the pitch.     Now it is a very disturbing story obviously with the ambulance
crushing his head but what is disturbing is the fact that that dead body
had not been cordoned off by stewards or police or the ambulance hadn't
been directed around.     O.K. it is a situation of confusion and mayhem as
I said but I think that this dead body was just left there.           Again as I
said that wasn't reported in the press but if that situation did happen
I wish the police would bring it to light because it suggests           a lack of
organisation on the pitch.     I would also like to say that I hope the
West Midlands, I did ask them, I think they are aware of it, a lad actually
took a video tape of the game he obviously went with the intention of
taping the football game but when he saw the trouble that was happening
he was taping it and this will go someway to determining as to whether the
fans were, as the press say offering violent acts to the police or urinating
on the police.     Now for me I never saw any of that at all and I think it is
important    to find out the truth about           that.   Now this video camera, Iam
sure that    will be used in evidence.    The video camera actually tapes the
stadium clock as well so I saw pictures of stills from it about 2.59 it
said on the stadium clock when the players were warming up you can see that
the people have spilled onto the pitch, so the situation there where they
should have known.     Apparently there was an attempt to abandon the kick-off,
well not abandon it but to make it a bit later but that message never got
through.     Well I can understand how that happened if there       were police outside
the ground and police inside they could see obviously they have got radios
why that could not have been done, so it is important that           that video camera
is used as evidence.     The thing about the fans unrinating and being aggressive
that can be put down to shock.     If someone has seen somebody who has died
well they literally go to pieces and that can be interpreted as violence
if you just see it for the first time.           There is also stories....I suppose
that is important about whether there was violence offered to someone I
did see a photographer apparently he had lifted up a blanket up off a dead
person to take a photograph and a few fans had rushed at him,           but he got
away.

                                                ( 175)
                                            -    15 -
     The police remedied the situation I suppose kept the fans away from him.
     But you see I think that was just a normal reaction, I think myself if I
     had seen that I would have literally flown at the photographer myself,
     especially in that situation.
I.   Did you witness that yourself?

I    Yes I could see that from a distance mind you.       It sort of took place
     on the right of the pitch, the far right and I was in the stand and I
     could see a few fans, but first of all I could see a photographer in and
     around people laying on the ground and I didn't know what he was doing but
     I could see him interfering with the bodies or lifting things up and that
     and the next thing I saw a few fans rush at him.        There was a point as
     well, I am sorry to have left this out on the violence question, there
     was an attempt by the few Liverpool supporters to rush to the Forest end
     because they had begun to chant obviously they didn't know what was happening
     and it was just a misunderstanding.        You see when fans are in shock and
     agitated these are normal reactions.
I.   And   you witnessed that yourself?

     I witnessed that myself.    Then what they did after that they got the police
     to go right across the centre of the pitch and I don't know how many police­
     men it takes to get across that ground but it was quite a few and it seems
     ironic that they could do it then but they couldn't do it outside the
     ground when there was obviously need for it.        Again they would have had
     time, as I said to the West Midlands police, people don't just appear* from
     thin air this build up happens gradually, o.k. it can happen quickly but
     not sudden in the flick of a finger type of thing, and I heard reports
     from friends that the crowd had been gathering in substantial crowds
     outside the ground at two o'clock even,an hour before the kick-off.
I.   Did   you attend the same semi-final at Hillsborough last year?
     I did yes.
I.   What was your experience?

     That was a terrible time actually finding out where we should have been.
     I was actually in the stands that time, now we walked to the wrong end
     of the ground, I was with another friend this time.        We walked to the
     wrong end and in fact we ended up walking all the way around the ground to
     get   to our proper end.    Now I just seem to remember trying to go up streets
     but they were all sectioned off by the police, there were actuallygates
     so you couldn't walk up never mind get a car to go up there, you weren't
     allowed to walk up.    You had to walk literally a mile or two until you got
     a street you could turn left down and then come back onto the ground going
     in an L shaped type of way to get back to the end in order to get to. ...
     that was hard that year.
                                       -    16 -
But I didn't see the same problems with build up of crowds outside although
I've seen that that was happening because it's a football game isn't it and
you do get crowds but I couldn't see any major problems.          At the stands
though I was I can't speak for what it was like on the terraces.          I do
remember that it was hard and it was particularly... in retrospect now
again it was a particularly hard ground to understand the actual directions
the turnstiles and all that and you could put it down to our own stupidity
if you are like me I consider myself fairly intelligent even though I say
it myself.   I do remember having difficulty me and my friend getting to
the right end last year.       That game passed off without any trouble.
Is there anything else you would like to add about anything you personally
witnessed?

I am trying to think now... I mentioned the things that I would like to
be taken into consideration in the enquiry because I think it is important.
No at the moment I can't really think of anything else.          Other than I will
bring my ticket in to actually show you and determine where itwas and what
turnstile I went through, I will do that tomorrow for you. O.K.
What it is if as the police said that there was a danger of a crush outside
the ground if that was the case then is there evidence, there was a suggestion
that a wall was about to collapse but I would like to know if there was any
structural damage to the stadium outside.          I haven't seen or read anything
in the press but it will be important and go some way... if there was
a wall that had received damage then you could say well maybe there was
danger of a crush.     I think that is important because that was the. reason
apparently why the police suggested that they opened that gate but I find
it a strange decision because if there are problems with congestion and
crushing it seems non-sensical to pack the people into an even more limited
and restricted area.     That is just a point I had forgotten to add.




                       E N D     OF        I N T E R V I E W
              DOCKLANDS HISTORY PROJECT   HILLSBOROUGH TESTIMONY

I    Your name?



I    Your address?




I    Are you employed?




     Did you have a ticket for the match?

     I did.

I    Where was this for?

        was f°r the B enclosure in the Leppings    Lane end.

I    How did you go down to Sheffield?

     0ne of   my friends drove down. There was four of us in the
car, one of   them was a Notts. Forest supporter and we all had
tickets.One   of my friends had a ticket for Leppings Lane and
another had   a ticket for the North Stand.

I   What time did you leave Liverpool?

     We left Liverpool at quarter past eleven.

I   What route did you take?

     We went down the M62 to Manchester and then got onto the
Snake Pass which took us straight to the ground, more or less.
I don t know the A roads.

I   Why had they decided on that route? Had there been anv
discussion before?

     Well, I've been to Sheffield Wednesday Ground quite a
couple^ of times and that's the route we've always taken either
when I ve gone by coach or by car.

I    What sort of journey did you have?




                         I
     Pretty uneventful. Road works on the M62 as usual, a
pretty uneventful journey. We found a parking space quite
easily, nothing to report really, just having a good time.

I    Did you stop at all on the way?

     We stopped once to go to the toilet and that was it.

I    How long for?

     Two minutes at a pub. We went straight in the pub and came
straight back out again.

I    Apart from the road works, you weren't delayed in any
other way?

     Not really. No, no   we weren't.


I    Where in Sheffield did your journey end?

     I wouldn't have a clue where abouts in Sheffield butall I
knew was it's 'Football'   'Liverpool supporters'. Once you got
near to Sheffield, the ground, there were signs for
Hillsborough and Liverpool End, so we just followed those
directions and eventually found a car parking space.

I    What time did you actually park?

     It must have been about half past one, with the traffic
and what have you coming near to the ground. But other than
that there were no bad delays or anything like that.

I    How far from the ground was it?

     We were quite lucky. We must have been, oh, half a mile
Trom the ground, five or ten minute walking. So we were lucky
in that respect because we got there that little bit earlier.

I    Did you go straight to the ground?

     We stopped off to get some chips and then we met some
people there. To my knowledge there was no pubs open to go to
so the only places open were chip shops. We had some chips, met
some lads and we were talking for about half-an-hour, three-
quarters of an hour and then made our way to the ground.

I    The other people you were talking to, were they football
supporters?

     Yes.

I    Were they Liverpool blokes.




                            X
     Well, as I say, one of the people in our car was a Notts.
Forest fan. Previously, I'd been to Blackpool on a scheme with
the Union and he was from Nottingham, and he had a ticket for
the Nottingham Forest end but he came with us.

I   What was the atmosphere like at that time?

I I It was like a carnival atmosphere, all looking forward to
the game, willing our team to go to Wembley, more or less
prematurely saying that we would be going to Wembley, and
having a really good time.

I   Other supporters around, did you notice them?

      Yes, the supporters around where we were, I knew a couple
off them and we started talking. They were, well everyone, was
in a happy mood. No trouble or anything like that, just having
a good time.

I    Did you see any police officers on your way to the ground
or when you were standing talking?

     There was quite a big police presence as soon as you got
off the Snake Pass, diverting traffic, I presume. Also, about
two miles before we hit the ground there was like an army of
police who were stopping coaches, looking for alcohol I presume
- well, I know they would be because I've been on coaches the
previous time. But they didn't stop us, they just let us go
straight through, we just overtook the coaches and carried on
towards our destination.

I    When you were standing talking, before you actually
started to make your way towards the ground, were there any
police officers around then?

     Yes,  but as I say, going to football matches you get
totally oblivious about seeing police. They must have been
around but I they didn't make any kind of trouble or anything
at that point, anyway.

I    Were you able easily to find the entrance to that part of
the ground that you had a ticket for?

     I'd been to Leppings Lane before, I knew the way it works
and I found it quite easily. Most of the Liverpool fans were
going towards the ground by that time anyway.

I    So they'd moved off together?

     Well, not so much together. People drifted slowly towards
    ground.

I    What time did you arrive at the ground?
                                                                   f




     At the ground. We were about two minutes away from the
ground at the chip shop. We must have, I'd say, got to the
ground about twenty past two.

I    What was happening when you got there? What was the
situation like then?

     The situation was three turnstiles with B section on them
for Liverpool supporters. When you go down towards it,
Hillsborough's like in a valley, so you're walking down a hill
and you can see the Liverpool supporters queuing up to get in.
There was no kind of organised line to get into the turnstiles,
it was just like a big mass, there was no organisation as such.
You just had to push, well, you got in and you were being
pushed towards the turnstile. Nearer to when you got to the
turnstile they actually made some kind of queue, nothing much,
only because the gate was so narrow. I mean, I missed the
actual once, trying to get my way back into the crowd to get
back into the turnstile.

I    How do you mean?

      The queue was so great and there was no organised lines,
peu pie were pushing
             _     _ either way. The turnstile is only about one
man1s width, with the push I just got pushed to one side and
then you couldn't get back in.

I    How many police officers did you see around the
turnstiles?

     I saw two and they were standing between three turnstiles.
There was one mounted policeman who said he came from Liverpool
because people were saying to him, "What's going on here?" and
they were calling him a woollyback or something, nothing
outrageous or anything like that. And he said, "Eh, I'm from
Liverpool." So I felt a bit strange to start off with, whether
he was or not I don't know but he was the only policeman on
horseback at that time.

I    The other police officers, man or woman?

| | Two men, two male. There were three entrances and two bits
of the wall and they were just there. Because I actually got
pushed on to one of the policemen who just like, roughly pushed
me back towards the crowd.

 I   Did he speak to you?

     He just said get back into the queue.

 I    Did you notice if either   of them carried radios?

      No I didn't notice if they carried radios.



                         4   -
I       Were you still with your friends at this point?

□    One of ray friends had a ticket for the North Stand so he
just walked in, well I presume he walked in because we were
early as such. We left him as we were going down towards our
turnstiles. My friend          turnstiles were to the side so he
walked into his turnstile there was no queue at that time, and
we just started to queue up then in a big mass,

I    Did you become separated from them at any time while at
that time outside or were you more or less, always together.

        Me and my friend     , were more or less together at that
time.

I   What were your feelings at that time.

[ID  My feelings were, as I've always said,  that it's
ridiculous that there s only three turnstiles and say, ten or
eleven thousand supporters supposed to get into this end. It
was the usual, you mumble and complain about getting into the
ground, I think it's more the excitement of getting into the
ground to have a little mumble and a complain before you
actually get in. It was just like a normal away match at that
time, really, maybe because I got there a bit early. The onLy
thing I didn t understand was just so few turnstiles to actuall
get into the ground and the police presence, there was hardLy
any. That was just, like, at the back of my mind, you didn't
really think about that.

I    Was it clear from the outset where the entrance to that
part of the ground you had a ticket for was?

        Again, I wouldn't know because I knew where I was going.

I       What was the atmosphere like then?

     Jovial, happy, everyone getting, cracking jokes, some of
them trying to eat their pies and that and getting squashed and
that. Just normal football banter.

I       What were the police doing at that time?

     They were just standing there. The policeman on the horse
was occasionally moving his horse in and out the crowd but
there wasn't any sort of organised queue until you got about
six yards away from the turnstile, because then you had to.

I       How many people were there?

        When I got there, one-and-a- half to two thousand maybe.

I       How long were you there before you entered the ground?



                              5   "
     With all the pushing and shoving and everything, about
half-an-rhour to forty minutes.

I        Would that be normal? Would expect that?

         Yes, I would expect that.

I        How. did you get in?

    ^    I got in through the turnstiles.

I        Which one?

         The one on the right; the furthest right one I got in to.

I        This would be then about quarter-to-three?

         About quarter-to-three, yes.

I        Were all the turnstiles open at that time.

         Yes, to my knowledge they were, yes.

I        Were you searched?

         No.

I        Was your ticket taken?

  I It was ripped, but I expected that. I think that's what
you mean?

I        Yes. Were there any police inside    the ground when you got
in?

  I Yes, there was about two on each turnstile when we
actually got in plus a couple of steward hanging around, you
know. That was about it.

I        Did any of them speak to you?

         No.

I        Did you hear them speak to anyone    else?

        | No.

I        How were you directed to the    section you were in?

     We weren't. There was no signpost. As you walked in
- all I can say is - there's like a big pen and there's a
tunnel straight opposite you, that's the tunnel you'll head for
because you can't really see the other... As soon as you walk
into the ground you can actually see the terracing and a bit of
the green of the grass so, automatically, you just head for the
centre one. There was nobody telling directions to go to left
or right, you just went where you thought.

I    What was happening inside the ground when you got there?

     Jovial, singing, chanting, we were just generally having a
good time. People were saying how it was ridiculous how they
could get the big end and we get the small end because we had
far more supporters plus far more average gate than Notts.
Forest do. We were all singing away. The atmosphere was great.
At that time, any way.

I    Did you go directly to the section.

     I stopped off to go to the toilet. My friend waited for me
outside the toilet and then we both strolled in.

I    Where exactly were you standing?

     We were standing in just left of the goal. When we got to
the ground it was crowded, it was just like a normal home game
really, it wasn't that bad so you could push and move where you
wanted, to get a good spec. We moved nearer to the front and
then we decided to move a little bit to the side because if
they scored there'd be a big crush. So we moved to the left
side of the goal post.

I    What time would you estimate that you reached the place
that you ended up in at the beginning of the match?

     Ten-to, five-to, just before the teams came out.

I    You were still with your friend at that time?

     Yes.

I    How did you feel at that time - when you had taken up your
position?

| | Excitement and looking forward to the game. Touch wood, it
would be a good game of football. Just generally bantering,
talking to people around, offering sweets, cigarettes, the
usual. But I started getting a little bit concerned just before
the teams started to come out. It was gettting much fuller and
there was, like, a surge when a few lads come in, it surged to
one side or forward or what-have-you. It was getting a bit of
that. But rf you stand up, you expect that so I wasn't that
bothered at that time.

I    Were you aware of any police officers in the ground
itself?
CD   The only police I saw were patrolling the perimeter of the
pitch. ,

I    When the teams came out then, you're saying that the area
around you was full but not to the extent that..?

      When the actual teams came out there was a massive surge
ancl people moving around but, as I say, I expected that from a
football game, everyone wants to have a look at the team and
that. I didn't think anything 'unordinary' about that.

I    At the kick-off what was happening?

     The kick-off was a totally different kettle of fish. First
of all kick-off came and suddenly we got more and more crushed
and my friend, Tony, he was by a barrier and he was trying to
move himself off using his hands against the barrier. I stood
back, I had a fellow standing in front of me, I was standing
back a little bit. Just after the kick-off, that's when it all
spilled over. At first, I saw a couple of lads down the front
climbing over. At first, people didn't know what was going on,
they were confused, people were saying "Get off, I can't see.
And then, suddenly, it dawned on me that it was something much
more serious than that. And, at the same time, we were getting
pushed sideways to railings about six foot, just a little bit
taller than me, plus with spikes on. And I was getting more and
more close to these railings, which means that I was like,
trapped, I couldn't move. Luckily, when that surge came, I got
pushed onto the side, if I went forward, I don't think I would
be here today.

I    In the beginning, what did you think was happening?

     I knew for a fact that it wasn't any kind of football
trouble because normally at football, if there's going to be
trouble, the chants start before actual fists fly I suppose.
So, I knew it wasn't that, I just thought these people were
getting out because some must have fainted or it was getting
hot. I knew for a fact that it wasn't a pitch invasion or a
hooligan element or anything like that. I just knew... because
you get that at the Kop, people get carried out.

 I    How soon before you realised that something was really
 wrong?

      As soon as I saw two or three lads go over at the same
 Time and literally get onto the pitch on the sidline, I knew
 something was wrong because the police started getting hold of
 them, dragging them, I presume to drag them out of the ground
 or to throw them back in, I just don't know. But the police
 quickly came over to these three or four lads who got out first
 but that was before the whole thing really took off.

 I    What did you feel at that time?
     At that time, I was more concerned with watching the
match, really. I saw a few lads go over and it was getting more
and more crushed and I was constantly thinking, 'I'm getting
nearer and nearer this railing, I'm going to have to somehow
wait until the crowd dies down and...' because that's what you
expect, to wait for the crowd to, like, settle and then move
your way around. But it wasn't to be, I was just getting more
and more squashed.

I   What were the   people around you doing?

     I didn't take much notice of what people were doing, I vas
trying to watch the match. But I couldn t see anything anyway
because these lads were climbing over and as soon as the last
few dropped, then I realised that something was terrible, was
totally wrong.

I   What happened   next?

     I got more and more crushed up against the barrier. And
then I realised... I could hear screams, there was no chanting
like you're used to, it was more screams, people swearing and
saying, 'How are we going to get out of here?  I was crushed up
against the barrier...

I    A barrier in front of you?

      No, no to the side, the railings, I should say, the
railings. I was trapped up against one of those but still... I
was squashed but I had full sense of what I was doing. There
was a couple of lads who, somehow got over these railings
first, there was no way I could have got   out without those lads
help. God knows how they got over... or they might have got
over the other side of the railings.   Because
there was these two railings and then there was like a
passageway where there was a gate, and then there were other
railings again, all in the same terraces. These lads got into
the middle bit and were trying to help people up by closing
their hands and sticking   them through the railings so you
could get a leg up over them, because they were slippery. At
that time there was pandemonium, people screaming^ clambering
over to try to get out. There was no way you could get out at
the front and there was no way you could get out at the back.,
the side was really the only alternative. The more people were
coming, the more crushed it was getting. I saw an old man, oh.,
he must have been about seventy, flat cap, all I can remember
was the look in his eyes, it was horrible, all welling up , he
just looked dazed, he was glazed, the whole of his body was'
 sagging and I honestly think that he just wanted to stay there
 and just get and just like get carried away, he wasn't bothered
with the pandemonium. We managed to grab hold of him and
 literally throw him, about six or seven of us, throw him out
 into the gangway. Then there were lads, eleven, twelve, you
were trying to grab hold of those and then you realised that
somehow you had to get yourself out. My f r i e n d , I L went
first and got over and fell. I got pushed up., the lad said,
'Put your foot..' into his hands to give me a lift up. He      _
lifted up, I got to the top and I looked over towards were the
people were by the stand and all you could see was like a
massive big crush. You just saw heads, bodies, bodies moving
and swaying and not going anywhere just staying. And then the
fella said, 'Just jump. Fall. I 11 catch you. which he did,
those lads were real martyrs, they saved my life. You could see
 they were still trying. Again, I was trying to help others but
 there was so many people lined up there you just couldn t. You
wish you could do more but you just couldn t. Andthen there
was just one policeman, by the gate, who was just casually...
 I'll never forget, he was just like casually opening it, like
 'Oh another one.' go past. And then we got onto the pitch and
 that's when...
I     Out of the gate? Which gate was this?

     This
     inis was
          was the
              nit; gate inbetween two
                    s auc          1  railings.° The side i^ _
                             .1       I   _   __ -   n r\a.   tr   > t U   f U   i
railines. If you got over there's a passageway where there s a
gate and then there's other railings. So, to get to any kind of
gate, you had to climb over these railings.

 I.   And the gate led onto the pitch?
         The gate led onto the pitch. There was one police officer
 at that time, there. I dashed on the pitch not thinking
 anything... I just thought it was a mad crush, I couldn t
 believe that anyone would have died. I ran on the pit?1} £nd *
 you could see was people lying there. At first, you think,         Oh,
 what are they doing? Maybe they're trying to... maybe I m
 wrong? maybe this isn't bad. And then.I realised, I s a w s o m e
 fella s leg and he must have broken his tib. and fib., just
 hanging loosely. And then, you saw people giving mouth to mouth
 resuscitations tp people but also you just saw people lying
  there, blue in the face. I'll never forget... a kid, he seemed
  to me to be about seven or eight just lying there and he had a
  pullover accross his head and then I realised the full extent
  of the carnage. And there was just mayhem going on. The
  police.. I didn't see any police... the police were like
  running around at the half-way line, they were more concerned
  about Liverpool fans going to have a go at the Notts. Forest
  fans. Me and my f r i e n d , ! j u s t looked around in total __
  disbelief     there was just carnage going on. I also saw a person
  of the pr4si taking pictures of"this body, one of those t h m g s
   1-hat- T find totally obscene and how could anyone do.. taKe
   pictures of p e o p l e d are dead, bodies, especially soon after.
   It was just disgusting. I., we were all shaken up, we ran back
    towards the terracing again where we saw a fella trying to be
    arrested by a policeman for ripping down the advertising
   hoardings to make into stretchers. We stood there by the
    terracing just looking over the terracing. The North Stand,
    where my friend was, we were looking there, naturally we were


                              [   O
concerned, maybe something could have happened there. And also
anguish, we knew there were dead bodies, we didn t know the
count or anything like that, we just saw, oh, about seven or
eight strewn about the ground by the six yard box and a bit
further out. And then St. John's Ambulance, who were really      .
totally inexperienced in situations like.that, were doing their
best. We were talking to people, seeing if they w e r e .alright,
if they could walk or anything... and then the more it got on,
the more people getting onto the pitch, the more we could
 find... Maybe if we stand on the terraces,.on the side. So
we... this was about twenty, twenty-five minutes, I can
 remember the time it was fifteen twenty-seven when that
happened because I can remember looking up at the electronic
 scoreboard and seeing the time. There was a gate on the side
 where a policeman was where we got through. On the side there
 was no pushing and shoving it was totally and utterly empty,
 there was so much room, I mean you could dance. We climbed over
 that and we just stood and watched it and you jsut felt^so
 helpless, you wanted to do more but you know you couldn t, it
 was awful       Also, you were worried about your friends who had
 gone. We knew we had to stay put, because we knew my friend
 Sould be worried stiff about us, who came down with us. He was
  in the North Stand. The police went to the half-way line> they
  iust stood on the half-way line probably assessing the
  situation. People were screaming for them to come and help but
  thev iust stood there. Then sudenly, you swaw reinforcements
  coming down the side. All they did was stop fans from the North
  Stand, it looked like, anyway, not let them get on the Pitch.
  Thev were more concerned with trying to keep order when there
  were people dying. These newspaper reports that I ve seen the
  last few days, just make me want to be sick. How can anyone say
  stuff like that? I was on that pitch for a good twenty-five
  minutes and I didn't see anything like that..All there was, was
   anguish, crying, hysteria really. I don t think anyone could
  have thought of stealing anything. A couple of policemen, they
   were great, the firemen were superb. I.can t remember what time
   the firemen came in but by that time, it hadn t sunk m
   anything. It was just like watching the telly. I mean, you see
   these disasters on telly and you just can't comprehend that it
   would ever happen to you and you can just see it in front or
   you. I can see it now, it was awful like ants,and the police
   were iust standing there. I was disgusted in them. I found out
   that later that their training involves basic first aid - why
   didn't they do it? They were more concerned to stop crowd
    trouble. How could there be any crowd trouble when there.are
   people lying there injured, dying. The couldn t be any tiype of
    crowd trouble at all.
  I    You say a couple of the police were quite helpful?

  I    Only the ones who were on the scene straight away. I think
  mavbe if they had orders they could have been brought back. I
  saw a couple give mouth to mouth rescusitation - very few. But
  there must have been over two or three hundred police there.


                          W
I    The policeman who was trying to arrest the bloke who was
trying to take down hoardings, what actually happened in that
incident?
      Well, we had just got out and we hadn't seen any kind of
bodies at that stage. All we saw was people being dragged out,
a lot of screaming, a lot of shouting, that's all I can think
about, the shouting and everything going on at once, it was too
much for my brain to really cope with. I saw this lad run over
to the advertising boards and just literally got his hands and
ripped it from there. A policeman ran over, grabbed hold of him
and then the fella shrugged away and said something,.there was
so much shouting going on and everything and next thing, the
policeman ran off in a towards the front of the goal, the
conversation must have gone on for about for about fifteen to
 twenty seconds. The policeman grabbed hold of the fella and the
 fella came as to say, he like pulled his shoulders back to ,
 like, say 'What are you doing?^ when he grabbed hold of him and
 then the conversation stopped. The policeman, I think, did have
 his hand on him as they were speaking and the policeman dashed
 off, like semi-jogged towards behind the goal. The fella
 proceeded to, and a few other people came along and helped him
 with the hoardings to make as stretchers. It was such
 pandemonium, we got back onto the terracing and we knew we had
 to stay put. All we wanted to do was get out of the ground and
 wish it had never happened, like this nightmare would end. But
 we knew we had to wait for my friend □       .who was up in the
 stand. We were just sitting there watching it. I mean, I
 couldn't watch any more, I just sat down on the terraces. Where
 we were when we came off the pitch, there was so much room, we
 could sit down and you could look at the sky. you could see the
  sky and you had loads of room around you. It was just like
  sitting in the pub or like me and you are now, there was that
  much room in this bit. We'd sit there, occasionally you d look
  up and then, all of a sudden, we saw... somehow, my friend .
         had got down from the stands and was looking on the pitch
  for us and then looking on the terraces. We managed to catch
  his attention and he then climbed over the actual fence to get
  with us. It was quite emotional actually, he broke down because
  he thought he'd seen me brought out on a stretcher, someone
  with the same jeans and trainees as I had.on. All we then .
  decided to do was walk out the ground. This was... I know it
  was past half-time, this must have been about four o clock, we
  left the ground. I know there was no police on the gates or
  anything, the gates that were supposedly opened.were open and
  we walked through there. There was streams of Liverpool
   supporters walking out, crying, just looking down, shoulders
   slumped. The police were just looking. A lot of Liverpool fans
   vented their anger out at the police. When we got outside the
   ground there was about two or three policemen and.one lad said,
    What are you doing out here? You should be back in there
   saving lives, or words to that effect. These policemen were
   iust looked at him and said, 'Listen, we'll decide our job,
   yg'^e staying here.' As we were walking back to the car, I must
say this, a fella was shouting at a policeman saying, 'How
would you like it if your eight year old kid was in there now
and you're standing out here? What are you doing? You're not
doing any purpose. Just look at us, we're all distraught.' The
policeman then threatened to arrest him if he didn't shut up. I
saw that with my own eyes because I had to drag the person away
because I really thought he'd be arrested. This policeman, he
was just like arrogant, I can describe him, the policeman, a
black moustache and cold brown eyes, just looking at you. Maybe
he was shook up, maybe he didn't know what to do, but there was
no need to put someone under arrest. The fella was saying, 'Go
on hten, arrest me if it solves anything.'

I.   The man himself was upset?

      He was distraught, the fella. I mean, the policemen must
see this every day so why pick on someone who's distraught?
Maybe they should just say, 'Get on your way.' there was no
need to threaten to.arrest him, he was upset. His friends were
there and I came over and just tried to... you know, 'Just walk
away. They're not worth it. I said that, I said, 'They're not
worth it. We can get them some other way but not now. Come on.'
We got back to the car, we were absolutely distraught. There
were people leaning on the car. Normally, you'd say, 'Hey, what
you doing?' But they were upset and crying. I was upset and
then you were worried about people back home worrying about you
and the people who'd lsot people and your friends. It was
horrible. We got the car and we turned round and all the way
along all you could see were people walking with their heads
slumped to the pavement. People just sitting there on grass
verges,   on people's lawns, the front lawns, you know, there's
a pavement and then there's a lawn, just sitting there, just
couldn't believe it. Everyone was... it was just numb. We got
back, we realised we had to phone, I had to phone my mum. The
phone boxes were either ripped out or the queues were
 absolutely unbelievable for telephone boxes. So we decided to
 get over the Pennines and get to some villages just before
Manchester to use a pub or anything like that. We went into one
 pub, I think it's the          \ that was just off the Snake
 Pass. We went into this pub to use the phone, we found out
 that the pub had closed at five o'clock because it was a
 children's pub or something and they weren't serving and they
 couldn't allow us to use the phone. So we walked out, pretty
 annoyed at that. We travelled on looking at pubs, almost alL
 the pubs doors were shut, this was about five to five, all the
 pubs doors were shut, may have been waiting to open again, no
 all day drinking, I don't know. Eventually, we found a pub, we
 got in, we phoned back home but then it was hitting us hard
 then, we were really upset and to make matters worse we broke
 down at Manchester. But, I must say, that all the people we saw
 in Manchester and in this village, I couldn't even remember
 the village, they were really good and they were really
 sympathetic. And people from Sheffield as well, were calling
 out, 'Are you O.K.? Do you want to come in for a cup of tea?'
By  that time we were just distraught, all we wanted to do was
get back home and hopefully wake up from the nightmare. But on
the way back we broke down, what must have been 'Sod's Law '
really, in Manchester. I got back home in |      |at twenty-
past- eleven to find out - all I heard was that there was
seventy-four dead - to find out then that there was ninety-
four, it was just too much for me. I just cried and cried.
Nothing in this world could comprehend what I saw. Working in
                   J just doesn t bear thinking about what I
saw that die. I was mentally scarred, probably for the rest of
my life. What doesn't help is seeing people not helping such as
the police. Just standing there. All they were concerned about
was, ' As long as there's no trouble and we do our job, keeping
the fans apart, who cares?' That was the impresssion I got of
the police there. And then when I found out, yesterday about
the gutter press, the tabloids, saying stuff like urinating on
policemen and pickpocketing and all that sort of stuff. What I
saw was tota; and utter nonsense. The police were hardly there,
in force anyway to do anything like that anyway. Literally,
they just stood and watched.

I    Did you see antone drunk, before, during or after the
match or did you see anyone who appeared to be drunk?

     It's hard to define being drunk at a football match
because people are singing and joking. They might have been for
a few drinks, I don't know. I didn't see anyone totally and
utterly legless, making a fool out of themselves. Anyone could
have had a drink, I didn't really notice. The lads where we
were had a couple of cans. We didn't take any drink with us,
which I must admit is unusual, because we like a can in the
car, we were just sharing out. They had about four cans and we
were just.taking sips out ot there cans. But to say about
anyone being legless and not Knowing what they were doing, no.
People were in very jovial spirits and happy.

I    Apart from thos two incidents that you mentioned, when the
police were threatening arrest, Did you actually see anybody
being arrested by the police at any time during the day.

     I can't say I saw anyone get arrested. The police, with
fans, people having goes at fans, I didn't see anyone. They
were in close proximity to each other,   shouting at each
other, but to actually see someone being dragged away, no, only
those two isolated incidents.

I   Did you, at any time after arriving at Sheffield, witness
any violence; within groups of Liverpool supporters?

     No.

I    Between groups of rival supporters?

     No.



                       i ’t -
I   Against any individuals of any sort?

    No.

I   Against police officers?

    No.

I   Against any members of the press or media?

     Is this before the game?

I   At any time during the day.

     I saw the pressman taking a picture of the dead body and I
saw a Liverpool fan run over and hit him. And then the police
intervened. The police didn't arrest him, they just intervened
and got the pressman out. That was the only isolated incident I
saw of any kind of violence. But I'm sorry, if I was there I
would I would have done the same thing.

I    Is there anything you wish to add to what you've said?

     Not really. What I saw at that game is with me for the
rest of my life. I just wish that I could have done, maybe a
bit more to help people. I just feel so sorry for the people
who died. After all this, I just thank God I'm still here.




End of Interview
