AMBULANCEMAN              (DRIVER) - HOYLAND STATION


Vehicle:   B1202




At (*) we received a call on station to go to Wombwell Golf Club which
turned out to be a fall, the patient suffering a small cut above the eye.


While taking this patient to Barnsley District General Hospital, we heard
control calling Barnsley base and requesting a crew to pick a team up from
casualty and proceed to Hillsborough.    We asked them if we could assist as
we would be arriving in a few minutes.    They told us to carry on to
casualty and see when we were green.


On arriving at casualty we asked were the team were and what was going on.
Nobody seemed to know anything.   I relayed this to control when we were
clear and while I was stood by a Barnsley man arrived for the team,
eventually he took the team and we followed on instructions from control to
go to the medical room.


When we got to Hillsborough Football Club, the immediate vicinity was
obviously chaotic with supporters and police etc.      Some police officers
directed us to the gymnasium entrance, we both pulled up behind two more
ambulances and all of us gathered the "teams" equipment up and proceeded on
foot through the entrance we had been shown.    We saw no other ambulance
personnel.


When we arrived at the gymnasium this is the first time we knew that we
were dealing with a "Major Incident".    I saw Mr. Hopkins nearby and told
him we had brought the team from Barnsley.     He told me it was not now
required but he needed body bags urgently.     On returning to the vehicle I
went and searched a line of vehicles and got approximately 10 bags which I
passed to Station Officer Eason who was now outside on the road.


After this I was stood by on the bus station car park.      At approximately
1700 hours I was moved with the rest of the vehicles to Hillsborough for a
debriefing and myself and the attendant were sent back to our station.
