            states:-

1.   My date of birth is 2nd October 1943.

2.   I am a Qualified Ambulanceman working from Longley
      Station.    I have 18 years service with Sheffield
     Corporation/SYMAS and hold the Miller Certificate. I have
      also passed local and national extended training, i.e. I
     am a paramedic.   I completed this extra training in July
      last year.

3.   I work on a normal emergency crew, sometimes driving,
      sometimes attending.   My vehicle carries additional
     equipment because I am a paramedic, being an EGC monitor,
     a defibrillator and a further box of equipment including
     intravenous fluid, intubation equipment and a bag and
     mask.

4.   On Saturday the 15th April 1989 I was on duty from 1000 to
     1800 hours.    This is my normal duty and I have been
     working normal shifts in the previous week.    I had taken
     Thursday and Friday off in lieu of the weekend, as I was
     due to work the day shift on Sunday also.

5.   I had not received any special briefing for the day of the
     match.

6.   At about 1503 or 1504 hours I had just taken an patient to
     the maternity unit at Northern General and on returning to
     the ambulance I would normally have radioed green - that
     is I would have told Control I was available for a further
     assignment. This was standard procedure, but in this case
     I could not get through because the channel was busy and I
     could hear messages being sent from Control to Alpha 4, Mr
     Eason. Mr Eason is the Station Officer at Longley and so
     I was fully aware that he was acting as Liaison Officer at
the ground.

I listened to half of this conversation, only being able
to hear what Control were saying, and gathered there was
something wrong at the match.     I heard a mention of a
barrier down or crush injuries - something of that sort.
I also understood that the Police were sending in some
kind of task force.

I suggested to my driver,               (another paramedic)
that we should go round the corner to the accident and
emergency department of the hospital to inform the charge
nurse that there was an incident at Hillsborough and it
sounded serious. I intended to forewarn him in case
casualties were expected.   I spoke to the charge nurse,
who said he had already taken a call from the Police
informing him of an incident.    He was obviously taking
this seriously. At this stage I was not aware that it was
a major incident, although I was still at the hospital
when Leading Ambulanceman        arrived and he later told
me that he had confirmed to the charge nurse that this was
a major incident.

On returning to the ambulance from the emergency
department I overheard a radio message - "All Sierra
vehicles come green as soon as possible". This meant all
Sheffield vehicles were to make themselves available
urgently and I immediately radioed in green at Northern
General Hospital on channel 2, which is the ordinary
emergency channel.  I also informed control that in view
of messages I had overheard, I had informed the charge
nurse to expect casualties.    Control said "Roger stand
by".

We waited for some minutes and were instructed to attend
an urgent call at            Road, Chapeltown unconnected
with the Hillsborough incident. We did so and brought the
patient back to Northern General.    I was aware that as
part of the major incident plan it is normal to avoid
taking non-emergency cases to hospitals within the area of
the incident to avoid overloading.           However the
alternative was to take this patient to Rotherham which
would have taken us to far away from Hillsborough and it
was also our duty to remain available to assist if
necessary.

By the time we got back to Northern General I had
overheard Control informing all vehicles attending
Hillsborough to switch to ERC channel. From this I knew
that it must be a major incident.

We unloaded the patient,, returned to the vehicle and
called green on channel 2 and were told to stand by.
After 10 minutes or so we reminded Control that we were
standing by at Northern General and were instructed to
return to base.    We went back to Longley Station and
confirmed our arrival to control.

After this we remained on duty, standing by at Longley
Station for the rest of the afternoon. We were not called
out except to a fight at a pub in Ecclesfield which is not
near the Hillsborough ground.   Even on this call we were
stood down before arriving at the scene.

At the end of the shift we offered to stay on if needed
and did stay over for about an hour, cleaning and reÂ­
equipping vehicles. However I was at no time required to
attend the football ground.

I logged out at 1900 hours and went home.
Signed



Dated this   ^   day of   r^A'y   1989
