                states:-

1.   My date of birth is the 24th April 1967.

2. I am a qualified Ambulance woman.      I obtained the Miller
Certificate after attending the compulsory residential course in
1985 and I worked as an unqualified Ambulance woman between 1985
and August 1988, when I was made up to qualified Ambulance woman.

3. I joined the Ambulance service as a cadet in 1983 and served
two years as a cadet, one year as an unqualified Ambulance woman
and from 1988 as a qualified Ambulance woman.      As a cadet I
worked at Moorgate Road Headquarters moving to Middlewood
Ambulance Station following completion of my training and in
November 1988 I moved to Longley Ambulance Station where I am
based.

4. On Saturday 15th April 1989 I was returning home from a trip
to the City centre. I was driving my car along Penistone Road at
approximately 1530 when I saw Ambulances outside the
Hillsborough football ground. I was diverted from Penistone Road
into Herries Road South and from there I continued my journey.

5. I was due to report to Longley Station at 1800 to work the
1800 to 0200 shift.      I decided at about 1645 that I should
report to the station. Atthis stage I was not aware of the
situation at Hillsborough football ground and having made the
decision to report for work, I changed and drove to the station,
where I arrived at 1730 There was one other crew memh e-r on
station,                |. we were contacted and were told by
control that we were not needed at Hillsborough and should stand
by.

6. At 1830 there was a call to the station by control using a
telephone requesting _____ and I to attend the Northern General
Hospital, Ward 60 to transfer patient number Q from that ward to
                                                                    I




the CT Scan Unit at the Royal Hallamshire Hospital.         and I
left the station and arrived at the Northern General Hospital,
and attended Ward 60 to collect the patient. We were told by a
staff nurse on Ward 60 (female, although I do not remember her
name) that there was no patient on Ward 60 to transfer and she
sent me to the casualty department.        and I waited for quite
a while until the patient arrived. The patient was loaded and
was in a stable condition and we took the patient to the Royal
Hallamshire Hospital.     We handed over the patient, returned to
our vehicle, radioed in to control that we were green and control
ordered us to return to the Northern General Hospital and collect
patient number Q .     The patient was transferred onto our cot
and into our vehicle, together with the doctor and nurse.

7. As I was the attendant at all times on this vehicle I radioed
control using channel 2 without difficulty, who told us to go to
the Porters Lodge at the Royal Hallamshire Hospital on arrival.
The patient was transferred to the CT Scan Unit.           and I
returned to our vehicle, I radioed control who instructed us to
return to base. We returned to base and carried on with the
normal duties for our shift.

8. At approximately 2230         and I were requested by control
to stand by to report to the Hillsborough football ground if
needed to assist in moving bodies from the temporary mortuary to
the Medico Legal Centre.

9.  At 0145 or 0150 on Sunday the 16th Leading Ambulance man,
       who was operating the radio, received a message from
control which he relayed to us, requesting        and I to attend
with the vehicle at Hillsborough football ground following
completion our normal shift. Upon completion of our shift at
0200 we made our way to the Hillsborough ground.
drove and we attended the Penistone Road entrance to the area
adjacent the gymnasium.    We met Station Officer Paul Eason who
                               2
gave         and I instructions on where to park the vehicle at
the rear of the gymnasium near the exit door and we were told to
take out the cots in the vehicle, and line them up outside the
gymnasium.    We were then told that the vehicle would take three
bodies accompanied by three Police men to the Sheffield Medico
Legal Centre.

10.        and I went into the gymnasium.    There were a lot of
bodies laid out in body bags on the floor and a police officer
was stood by each body.    The deceased were being identified by
relatives.

11*        and I were then told, that three bodies were ready to
be transported. The police and Station Officer Paul Eason
coordinated the movement of the bodies from the temporary
mortuary in the gymnasium onto the ambulance.      Each body was
accompanied by a policeman throughout.      When the bodies and
policemen were loaded onto our vehicle, we drove to the Medico
Legal Centre and handed over the bodies to the staff from the
Medico Legal Centre.          and I made three or four trips to
the Medico Legal Centre from the Hillsborough football ground.

12.        and I communicated with Station Officer Paul Eason at
all times who was coordinating the operations and checking the
bodies and the numbers of Police men as they were loaded onto the
Ambulance. I recall that the bodies we were taking on the last
trip to the Medico Legal Centre were unidentified.

13. Following our last trip with bodies to the Medico Legal
Centre       and I returned to base. On our return to base we
radioed into control at about 0600 in the morning to confirm




                            29 3
our position. We cleaned out the Ambulance, filled it up with
fuel and washed it down.



Dated this   /   day of^AprdÂ»l 1989

Signed




                             JL<\ 4
