           - AMBULANCEMAN - LONGLEY AMBULANCE STATION


Date:   19.4.89


At approximately 1510 hours on Saturday 15th April 1989, I was listening to
the radio at home when I heard that there was some kind of incident at
Hillsborough Football ground.

I telephoned Ambulance Control to find out if I was required, and was asked
to report to my own Station.

On arrival at Longley, I crewed up with QAM              on Ambulance call
sign Sierra 462 which was a sitting case vehicle and proceeded to the
football ground where we were directed into a queue of ambulances at the
Penistone Road entrance to the ground where we liaised with Station Officer
Paul Eason who instructed us to proceed into the ground to attend to
walking wounded patients.

We attended to ten patients, loaded them into the ambulance and was then
instructed by Station O ff i c er ________________ to take them to the Royal
Hallamshire Hospital. On arrival at the hospital we handed the patients
over to casualty staff.

QAM I         and myself then called to Control that we were clear at RHH
and we were told to proceed to Herries Road Bus Garage to standby and wait
for further instructions. On arrival at the bus garage we were met by
Station Officer Paul Eason who organised all ambulances into order.

At approximately 1715 hours, S.O P Eason instructed QAM          Ito
proceed on foot to the football ground. At regular intervals, ambulances
were dispatched as they were required until approximately 1745 hours. I
went with Station Officer Eason to the Penistone Road entance at 1800
hours, I was instructed to call Control and tell them that I was clear of
the incident.

I was then returned to base where I stocked my vehicle and left station at
1830 hours.
